ence of the consciousness of the 
other which is more direct than the consciousness of the self. 
As a consequence, the only truly essential difference which Husserl 
maintained between the notion of individuality and that of collectivity is 
effaced, and one has left, on both sides, only more or less systematic sets of 
conscious phenomena, intrinsically bound to each other: the individual, like 
the collectivity, is "legion." 
It is evident that the individual grouping serves as the model of the social 
grouping. H usserl did not definitely free himself of individualism, failing to 
give a clear conception of the individual in relation to society. 
We must also assert that he did not avoid a restoration of organicism. The 
clearest manifestation of this deviation may be recognized in the metaphysical 
extensions which he believed were proper to furnish to his phenomenology. 
The world is ultimately presented as an immense society, the members of 
which occupy places, and exercise functions of different, and hierarchically 
ordered types, in the same way as there are many types of cells and functions in 
an organism. The universe's evolutionary path has, for a model, the 
development of the human being, from the embryo to the highest 
manifestations of reason: phylogenesis repeats ontogenesis. It is not by 
accident that H usserl saw in the community of philosophers and scientists a 
sort of "functional brain" of society and of Western Culture.51 As in Plato, 
from whom he takes the formulation, society is "man writ large. "52 
For the profound analyses of Husserl to bearfruit, we must rid them of their 
"egocentrism," take up the study of th(: experience of the other, and arrive at a 
notion less deliquescent to individuality. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
aM uch of the material referred to in this article may be found in E. Husserl, Zur 
Phiinomen%gie der lntersubjektivitiit, H usserliana, Vols. XII, XIV, XV, ed., 
I. Kern (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973) which had not been published 
when this article appeared. 
NOTES TO THE TEXT 
I. This situation will change, perhaps, when the important group of documents is 
transcribed - more than a-thousand pages in shorthand - relating to this theme, 
and conserved at Louvain. 
2. Cf. especially the paragraph: "Die Person in Personenverband," Ideen II, pp. 
190-200. 
UNDERSTANDING HUSSERL'S TRANSCENDENTAL 
PHENOMENOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTORY ESSAY 
J.N. MOHANTY 
"Essence," "transcendental subjectivity," and "lifeworld" are the three 
cornerstones of Husserlian thinking. They are also respectively the key 
concepts of what has been regarded as the three stages of the development of 
H usserl's thoughts. The concept of the a priori, in a narrow sense, is 
coextensive with that of "essence"; in a broader sense, it appears to range over 
all three. And yet, curiously enough, the concepts of transcendental 
subjectivity and lifeworld seem to situate philosophical thinking beyond the 
a priori - a posteriori opposition. The tensions in H usserl's thought derive as 
well from the complex relationship between these three key concepts, I as from 
the way they both appropriate and seek to go beyond traditional western 
thinking on these matters. The essays collected in this volume may be studied 
as bearing on these tensions. 
II 
But let us begin with the question of the principle of H usserl interpretation, a 
question that is but a singular instance coming under a general issue: how are 
we to understand and interpret the thoughts of a philosopher? It is to this 
question that Fink's essays address themselves. The questions which Fink 
raises concern the relation between a philosophical text, the author's 
understanding of it and the integrity of our interpretation of the thoughts of 
the philosopher as expressed (or concealed) in the text. Neither the 
documented text nor the author's own understanding of the text is adequate 
guide to interpretation. Not the former., for the words of the text may conceal, 
rather than express, and may even express precisely by concealing, some 
fundamental movements of thought; also, because the words are dead matter 
unless the interpreter infuses them with life, or awakens the living thought in 
them by comprehending the total meaning-intention of the text. A purely 
textual exegesis may fail precisely in doing that. One may then turn to the 
1 
2 
author's own understanding of the text, to what the author says he wanted to 
conveyor express. That again is helpful, but is not certainly an unerring guide. 
For one thing, what the author says he means gives us again a text whose 
meaning needs to be ascertained, so that we understand the main text with the 
help of other texts. For another, the author's understanding of his tcxt is on 
interpretation, and insofar as it is one it may need to compete amongst other 
rival interpretations, and unless one locates meaning in the transparency of 
the author's,! speaker's inner life and so concedes a privileged and unerring 
access to the author, not alone to what he meant but also to what his text 
means, it need not always be the case that the author's own self-understanding 
is the measure of all subsequent interpretations. Not only is it likely that the 
author's pronouncement of what he meant by a text is removed from the text 
by time, so that what we have may be an attempt to recapture an intention that 
is lost in its original freshness; but it is necessarily the case - irrespective of 
the temporal sequence involved - that the author's self-understanding is 
determined by his perception of his historical situation (which may fall short 
of what that situation in fact is) and so may limit his grasp over the totality of 
problem-situation that motivated his thinking. In other words, the total 
horizon within which the specific problems which an author formulates are 
possible as problems may be. not merely unexpressed in the words of the text, 
but also concealed from the author's self-understanding. 
These possibilities are certainly pertinent in the case of reading a single text, 
and may be less so in the case of the entire corpus of an author. In the latter 
case, the inadequacies of expression and the concealment-unconcealment 
structure are progressively overcome, if not totally eliminated. There is a 
historical development in the author's self-understanding which begins to 
throw light on some otherwise opaque and misunderstood texts even if it 
conceals others. Lights and shadows tend to conceal one another, and a clear 
view tends to emerge. The prospects are relatively more promising in the casr 
of an author such as Husser!, who continues. in all his phenomenologica. 
tex1 s, to pursue one goal of scientificity and progressively deepens and 
radicalises his self-understanding with regard to that goal and his own 
progress towards achieving it. But this does not altogether eliminate the 
skeptical considerations of the preceding paragraph. 
Fink distinguishes between the fundamental question of a philosopher and 
the particular problems he tries to solve. How to determine this fundamental 
question? The method does not show the problem, it is rather the problem 
which determines the method. Nor does it help to turn to the theme, for the 
sense of "theme" in philosophy differs radically from what it is in the positive 
sciences. While in both. one would expect, the theme refers baek to a 
background which is not thematised. so that the theme has a "problem-
horizon," in philosophy - more than in the positive sciences - the theme is 
determined by the problem and not vice versa. The task of interpretation. 
3 
then, is to explicate this problem-horizon of a text, and from there to reach 
forward to the more thematic problems, methods and theses. 
Fink is obviously referring to what Heidegger has called the Ungedachte: 
that which, while remaining unthought in a philosopher's texts, yet 
determines and makes possible what is thought in the manner in which it is 
thought. 
But how to explicate this Ungedachte? Fink's important 
contribution to the problem of interpretation lies in a distinction he draws 
between the thematic and the operative concepts of a philosophy. The 
thematic concepts, according to him, are those in which a philosophy aims 
intentionally to fix and preserve what is being thought. I think that the 
decisive components, in this formulation, are the ideas of "intentionally 
aiming" and "fixation." The philosopher must after all self-consciously want 
his thoughts to be understood in terms of a thematic concept. Furthermore, a 
thematic concept is "fixed," determined (definitionally or otherwise) and 
handed down to posterity by the philosopher as embodying the central thrust 
of his thinking. Such are, for example, Plato's "Ideas," Aristotle's "ousia," 
"dynamis" and "energia," Leibnitz's "monad," Kant's "transcendental," 
Hegel's "spirit" and Husserl's "transcendental subjectivity." But while 
philosophical thinking self-consciously determines such concepts and 
embodies in them its understanding of its results and its methods, at the same 
time, in that very process, it makes use of some other concepts without 
thematising them. These latter are called by Fink "operative" concepts. As a 
careful reading of Fink's essay on operative concepts in Husserl's philosophy 
will show, he says various things about what such concepts are and what they 
are not. They are called "intellectual schemata" which are used but not 
objectively fixed; "cognitive presentations," "conceptual fields" and, also, 
"conceptual medium" through which one thinks and sees; "the shadow of 
thought" cast by thinking, "that with which and through which the thematic 
light of comprehension had been formulated in the first place. "The examples 
he gives us of such operative concepts are: the category of "domination," in 
Marx; the relation between the "transcendentals" ens and verum, in Kant; 
"phenomenon," "constitution," "performance," in Husserl. 
In this introductory essay, I can only briefly reflect upon the nature of 
Fink's distinction. By "operative" concepts, Fink does not mean merely 
unproven assumptions and naive presuppositions. It is commonly held that 
most thinking, scientific or philosophical, proceeds on assumptions and 
presuppositions which it naively makes, of which it is often unaware, and 
which it is, within its own discourse, incapable of explicating or grounding. 
Fink obviously is not drawing attention to these, for his distinction applies 
specifically to philosophical thinking, whereas unproven assumptions and 
naive presuppositions may be regarded as vitiating all thinking. That thinking 
in the positive sciences is founded upon an already handed-down understanding 
of being and its division into regions, and therefore is in need of both regional 
4 
ontologies as well as a critique of the understanding of bcing which it takes up 
as unquestionable, have been well pointed out by Husseri and Heidegger -
and in the essays by Fink and Landgrebc in the present volume. But in his 
emphasis on operative concepts, Fink is drawing attention to the necessity of a 
similar naivety even at the level of philosophical discourse. What then is the 
difference between this philosophical naivety and that naivety of the positive 
sciences? Can we say, in reply, that the thinking in the positive sciences, in fact 
the very concept of "positive science" is constituted by that naivety, whereas 
philosophical thinking while not constituted by the naivety of unreflectively 
using operative concepts, generates such concepts as it proceeds on its work? 
In that case, the naivety of philosophical thinking, insofar as it necessarily 
casts shadows, to use Fink's language, is radically different from the naivety 
of the positive sciences. They are, as naiveties, different. 
If, then, Fink's operative concepts are not to be understood as unproven 
assumptions or naive presuppositions, what are they? It is common in our 
times to speak of conceptual frameworks which underlie thinking. There is a 
definitive sense of this locution in the context of the positive sciences, 
especially of the social sciences. As applied to philosophical thinking, the talk 
of conceptual frameworks is less definitive but nevertheless has some 
assignable sense and validity. One speaks of the physicalistic framework of 
much of contemporary analytic philosophy, or of the mentalistic framework 
of intentionalistic philosophies: these refer to ultimate presuppositions, 
theoretical commitments, perhaps valuational appraisals, which are not any 
further justifiable within the systems concerned. It seems to me that Fink is 
not speaking of conceptual frameworks in this sense. 
As we try to determine positively what Fink means by operative concepts, 
he appears to have in mind several different, even if related, things: first, therc 
is the Heideggerian Ungedachte, not thought within the system but making 
possible what is thought precisely as it is thought: the horizon of sense within 
which the problems and the themes first become posited for a systcm: thc 
mode of access which a philosophical thinking uses to deal with its theme. by 
which is meant: not so much the method which may have been explicitly 
thematised if the thinking is critical, but what makes such method first 
possible in relation to the given theme: and fundamental concepts which are 
necessary correlates of concepts which have been thematised. An example of 
the first, of course, is the concept of Being as enduring presence, and so a 
certain relation between Being and time with regard to the dominant strand of 
western metaphysics; an example of the second is the understanding of Being 
as object, within which the Kantian problematic first becomes possible: of the 
third, the mode of reflection Kant employs in the critiques and the mode of 
knowledge which the critical philosophy itself gives, which, according to a 
standard Hegelian critique of Kant, was never and cannot, in principle, be 
thematised within the self-prescribed limits of Kantian epistemology: and, 
5 
finally, of the fourth, such conceptual phenomena as the necessary 
correlation between "rest" and "movement," "one" and "being," "identity" 
and "difference" in Platonic dialectics. 
It does seem as though the fact that every philosophical system generates its 
own operative concepts must be closely connected with the finiteness and 
situatedness of the philosopher, with his lack of omniscience, with the 
perspectival and temporal character of all thinking. But even here we should 
be aware of misunderstanding Fink's decisive concept. Perception is 
perspectival, both the percipient and the scientist are as much finite and 
situated as the reflecting philosopher, their thinking as much temporal, and 
they all as little omniscient. True, there always shall remain open and unsolved 
problems for every system; it may even be true that every philosophical 
thinking encounters, at some point, unsolvable problems (which Nicolai 
Hartmann called "the metaphysical"). But not all these are "operative" in 
Fink's sense, although some of Fink's formulations may appear not to want to 
distinguish between them. Only those unsolved problems and dark regions 
deserve to be called "operative" which are generated or subtended by the 
movement of one's thought and the course of its thematisation. Thus, it seems 
as though Kant, in his First Critique, while thematising the question of the 
possibility of pure mathematics and mathematical physics, operated with a 
mode of reflective knowledge of the structure of human subjectivity which he 
could not then, in that very discourse, make his theme. But the case is very 
different when, in the Parmenides, Plato shows how the thought of being leads 
to that of unity, and vice versa: where one is dealing not with the tension 
between thematic and operative concepts, but with the reciprocal implication 
of two concepts, one of which is explicitly but the other implicitly thematised 
Fink's account also suggests, applied to Husserl's phenomenology, as 
though the world and individual worldly objects constitute the universal and 
specific themes of natural attitude (he also calls the natural attitude "the basic 
thematic attitude of humanity") while the attempt, through the epoche, to 
thematise this fact of the natural thematic attitude, lays bare the operative 
presuppositions of that attitude: for example, the acts of subjective 
experiencing through which a natural object comes to self-given ness. We do 
not want to raise the question of whether the world is the universal theme of 
natural attitude; but since our present effort is to precisely understand the 
distinction Fink has in mind, I would simply want to note the following: what 
are operative in the thematisation of the wordly objects in the natural attitude 
are the SUbjective experiencings themselves, but we do not thereby get 
operative concepts but, rather, operative phenomena. The subjective 
experiencings are not conceptual media through which the thematised objects 
become objects for us, but they nevertheless are operative in the process of 
those objects' coming to appear for us. Shall we then distinguish between 
operative concepts and operative phenomena? Furthermore. these subjective 
6 
experiencings are operative already in the thematisation that takes place 
within the natural attitude. When this thematisation itself is thematised. 
through the epoche, by phenomenology, what new operative concepts and 
phenomena are thereby "generated"? Fink sees this problem and tells us that 
what were originally operative experiencings are transformed into operative 
concepts. But then we are faced with a curious situation. namely. that by the 
very same process as reflection brings the operative experiencings "out of the 
shadow," it also forms the operative concepts which are but conceptual 
expressions of them. 
I think the problem we are encountering concerns to what extent, if at all. a 
philosophy can lay bare its own operative concepts. Husserl's philosophy. 
according to Fink, does attempt to do this to a considerable extent. There is no 
doubt that H usserl does thematise, and reflect at great length on. the concepts 
of phenomenon, constitution, reduction and transcendental SUbjectivity. 
What Fink insists is that they have not been, and cannot in principle be, fully 
clarified within Husserl's philosophy, for no philosophy can be in complete 
possession of all its concepts. But, again, we need to ask: is not that true even 
of the thematised concepts themselves? Furthermore, what other operative 
concepts are "subtended" as phenomenology seeks to reflect, e.g., on the 
concept of constitution, itself an operative concept? These question are raised 
only to show that Fink's distinction is so decisive that we need to give much 
more thought to it than has been done since Fink published his essay. Perhaps 
in the long run, the distinction will give way, but as a preliminary and heuristic 
distinction its value cannot be exceeded by any other in the literature on 
hermeneutics. 
A mode of philosophising which is content with its naivety, in fact 
reconciled to it, may be undisturbed by such considerations and proceed to 
assimilate its naivety to that of the positive sciences. But critical and radical 
philosophising such as phenomenology cannot but attempt to understand, 
appropriate and overcome all its naivety. As Fink notes, Hegelian 
"speculative proposition," Heidegger's "hermeneutic circle" and Husserl's 
"phenomenological reduction" are attempts to deal with the tension between 
thematic and operative concepts. 
III 
Can we still regard phenomenology, considered as a radical, critical 
philosophy, as a descriptive science? Fink, Landgrebe and Funke all agree 
that phenomenology as transcendental philosophy cannot be merely 
descriptive. For Fink, eidetic description is pre-philosophical. The so-called 
eidetic ontologies are only misleadingly called ontologies: they are closer to 
the positive sciences. To consider intentionalities as data is, according to Fink, 
7 
to be guilty of a "sensationalism of intentionality." Phenomenology has to 
proceed, not by noetic reflection on acts, but by noematic reflection on 
constituted senses; its goal is to uncover the operative intentionality as the 
constituting ground. But in this task, the very sense of "description "undergoes 
transformation inasmuch as here description cannot be understood as faithful 
depiction of what is given as being present. Operative intentionality. the sense-
forming life, cannot be made an object for investigation in the same sense as 
mundane facts, essences and constituted meanings are. I n effect, the idea of a 
descriptive phenomenology. as usually understood, has to be overcome as we 
overcome an untenable idea of a merely positing, objectivating consciousness, 
the idea of the merely given datum, and the idea of a thematising reflection. 
The being of operative intentionality is not the being of an object. 
Funke, whose understanding of Husserlian phenomenology otherwise 
radically differs from Fink's. would agree with the last statement but denies 
that we can at all speak of the heing of the constituting subjectivity. If the 
transcendental subjectivity is a functioning subjectivity, then of it we cannot 
say, it is. 2 And transcendental phenomenology, as transcendental thinking, is 
not a science of what is immediately accessible; as critical, it is not and cannot 
be descriptive. 3 For Funke, facticity is the field of metaphysics, not of critical, 
transcendental thinking.4 True philosophy cannot remain satisfied with 
merely describing the appearances as they have become evident. As science, 
philosophy has to look for the validation of such self-evidences by showing 
why, on a definite level of consciousness, something must appear to be 
evident. It then becomes investigation into the universal correlation between 
consciousness and being. Description provides the starting point for such 
enquiry. Only an uncritical philosophy can be pure positivism. 
In his essay on regions of being and regional ontologies in Husserl's 
phenomenology, included in this volume, Landgrebe takes up the decisive 
question about the place of eidetic ontologies in a truly transcendental 
philosophy. The regional ontologies. no doubt, provide foundations for the 
empirical sciences inasmuch as they determine what must belong to an object 
necessarily in order for it to become object of a given science. But at the same 
time the distinctions of regions of being reflect the prejudices and perspectives 
according to which things appear to us today so obviously. The distinctions of 
regions, then, provide us with the guiding principles 
(Lei~laden) for 
phenomenology to ask, "How can things become objects of consciousness in 
such a way that such demarcations of regions are at all possible?" Thus far 
Funke and Landgrebe would agree. But beyond this, there are vast differences 
between their understandings of phenomenology. For the present, we may 
note the decisive role which Landgrebe - exactly in opposition to Funke's 
thesis- assigns to the concept of facticillY in H usserlian thinking. If, according 
to Funke, critical philosophy is concerned with validation and not with 
facticity, Landgrebe, in an essay dating from 1939,5 insisted that the facticity 
8 
of Dasein as conceived by Heidegger should not be confused with the fact of 
being human (Faktum des Menschseins) in the Husserlian sense of a mundane 
fact. Even Husserlian transcendental subjectivity, as Landgrebe understands 
it, is not an eidos, a pure consciousness in general, but the concrete, historical 
process of intersubjective experience in which the world is being historically 
constituted.6 Transcendental subjectivity, so understood, may be regarded as 
much as consciousness as Life. H usserlian essences are thereby assigned a new 
role: they are not entities constituting a metaphysical domain, but they are 
rather the horizon of possibilities of comprehension through which the actual, 
factually constituted world can be made visible in its horizons and limits. The 
ultimate fact is transcendental sUbjectivity.7 In a later essay, Landgrebe 
contends that in understanding this founding domain as a field of absolute, 
historical experience, Husser! overcame not only the a priori - a posteriori 
distinction, but also the Cartesian tradition of rationalistic idealism. 8 
On closer examination, it seems that the opposition between Funke's 
rejection of all facticity from the transcendental domain and Landgrebe's 
characterisation of the transcendental as the ultimate fact may, in a large 
measure, be due to different ways in which they are using the terms "fact" and 
"facticity." Funke is right in insisting that since all ontological claims are 
constituted, the constituting consciousness in which all such claims are to be 
validated cannot itself be given an ontological status. Landgrebe is right in 
insisting not only that the Cartesian notion of consciousness is overcome by 
Husserl, but also that the Husserlian transcendental subjectivity is a field of 
experience in which meanings are constituted. If it is not an eidos, as Funke 
will agree, and if it is not a mundane fact, given in its positivity, as Landgrebe 
will concede, then we can salvage an understanding of Husser! that is common 
to them both, and that stands opposed to a dominant strand of the modern 
western metaphysical tradition. 
In order to be able to appreciate the novelty of this H usser!ian thought, let 
us briefly recall two important and perceptive criticisms of H usserl, both 
representing that tradition which Husserl may be said to have overcome. Hans 
Wagner has argued that Husser! wrongly replaces the principles of 
philosophy, which alone can provide ultimate grounding for knowledge, by a 
domain of experience, the subjective sphere. Such a sphere cannot provide the 
conditions of the possibility of validity of knowledge. Validity can only be 
accounted for by principles. 9 Dieter Henrich agrees with Wagner that H usserl, 
in spite of his plans to do so, could not have given a critique oftranscendental 
experience. According to Henrich, Husserl never came to reflect on the 
categories and their dialectical development, and remained stuck at the level 
of act-noema distinction which Hegelian reflection abolishes in favor of 
noemata alone. Husser! not only did not search for grounding principles, but 
moreover did not recognise the relational and dialectical nature of the 
ultimate principles of philosophy.IO It hardly needs to be recalled that the 
9 
critiques of Wagner and Henrich are from the standpoints ofNeo-Kantianism 
and Hegelian logic, respectively. How are we to respond to them? 
Funke has encountered such critics by pointing out that it is not admissible 
to ask about the being ofthe constitutive subjectivity inasmuch as "being" and 
"non-being" are idealities grounded in the meaning-constituting life. It is 
hasty to conclude that since Husserl speaks of a domain of experience as the 
constituting ground, such a domain must be mundane. I I On the contrary, the 
logical-epistemological principles, as constituted idealities, are themselves to 
be regarded as mundane. Landgrebe also briefly meets the criticism: the idea 
of priority acquires a new understanding with Husserl. 12 But the really 
decisive response to Wagner ought to run as follows: Husserlian 
transcendental philosophy is not an enquiry into the conditions of the 
possibility of a given body of scientific knowledge regarded as a priori true of 
the world. Its fundamental question is not, how is scientific truth possible, but 
rather: how are meanings - including the meanings "science" and "truth"-
possible? lfthe possibility of a body oftruths is grounded in principles (such as 
the Kantian), the meanings are constituted in the originary life of 
consciousness. 13 As regards Henrich's point, the following may suffice for our 
present purpose: the idea of a science of noemata alone and of their self-
development could be an alternative phenomenology, but such a science could 
not possibly lay claim to that radical presuppositionlessness which Husserl 
sought. For noemata are noemata of acts, and acts have their genesis in the 
total horizon of conscious life, so that to abstract from the noetic aspect, even 
if by dialectically overcoming the standpoint of consciousness in the manner 
of Hegel, is precisely to abstract from that domain in which noemata have 
their origin. To hypostatise them as self-moving and self-developing notions 
is to presuppose a movement of reflective thinking which itself is a form of 
noetic act. 
IV 
The movement of Husserl's thought shows two motives: on the one hand, 
there is an unceasing search for the originary experience, in which ~II 
meanings are constituted; on the other, there is a fascination for the ideal of an 
apodictic grounding of knowledge in an eidetic science. 14 Landgrebe has 
sought to show in several of his essays, including the two included in this 
volume, how Husserl was led to abandon the latter motive in favor of the 
former. What then are we to understand by the phenomenological program of 
Zuruck zu den Sachen Selbst? For Fink, it is a call to re-establish an original 
closeness to being by overcoming the obscurity caused by tradition and history. 
"Original" means here the mode of access to being, which does not point back 
to any other (as memory points back to perception), it amounts to a seeing 
10 
which is also a self-givenness of being, an experience which is knowingly-being-
with-the-existent. Funke's understanding of the "Sache" is not very far 
removed from this: it is the transcendental subjectivity as that which shows 
itself by itself, and by which all theses and position-takings are validated. It is 
surprising how utterly the early "realistic" phenomenologists failed to realise 
that Husserl's transcendental move was not tantamount to abandoning the 
original program of returning to the Sachen selbst. 
What does the "return," the going back, mean? For Fink, it is a "radical 
turning back," which is not possible without the famed epoche. T~ere are 
various questions about the epoche which these commentators raise here as 
well as elsewhere. First, what could motivate the reduction? In the Ideas I, 
Husserl's manner of introduction of the reduction suggests as though it is a 
matter of our freedom not to participate in the beliefs of the natural 
standpoint. As long as the necessity of this step is not further grounded, 
Landgrebe finds here a naivety that needs to be overcome. In the Erste 
Philosophie II, the radical philosopher's search for an absolute beginning is 
traced back to the fact of cognitive striving towards a totally grounded 
knowledge. But the question remains, how can this mundane fact about the 
governing telos of man's cognitive life motivate an epoche that is to 
comprehend the entire mundane order of discourse? In his important 1933 
essay, Fink recognises this problem and insists that in the natural attitude 
reduction would of course appear "unmotivated," while it is for the first time 
in the transcendence of the world that it is seen in its "transcendental 
motivation. "15 Fink can therefore say that the reduction presupposes itself 
and that the true theory of reduction cannot be stated at the beginning of the 
reduction. In his 1939 essay, included in this volume, Fink insists that 
phenomenology is not inspired by the traditional concept of philosophy or by 
a traditional idea of cognitive procedure. It is phenomenology alone which 
establishes the concept of a phenomenological philosophy in the sense of a 
striving after the original connection between being and knowledge. The 
reduction, therefore, is not a methodological step to isolate a new region, i.e., 
the region of pure consciousness, for pure consciousness is not a region at all. 
It certainly lays bare transcendental subjectivity, but transcendental 
subjectivity is not a region like the regions "material being," "living being" or 
"psychic being." In the 1933 essay, Fink had so much emphasised the divide 
between the mundane and the transcendental that he thought it impossible to 
correctly understand the sense of reduction as long as one takes the "I" that 
lives in the world-belief and the "I "that effects the epoche as one and the same, 
i.e., as long as they are identified simpliciter. The clue, for him, lies in 
recognising the most peculiar identity of the three "I "s: the I or man, the 
transcendental I, and the I which performs the epoche, i.e., the transcendental 
observer. 16 However, in the essay on operative concepts, Fink perceives a 
much closer relation between the mundane and the transcendental, for now 
II 
reduction is understood as Husserl's way of dealing with and appropriating 
the tension between the thematic and opetative concepts of his thinking, 
whereby transcendental subjectivity previously operative and lived through is 
sought to be brought out of the shadow into thematic light. This is not to say 
that H usserl succeeded in this enterprise. If Fink is correct, no philosopher 
could succeed in fully resolving that tension. In the present case, Fink insists 
on a resulting indeterminacy in Husserl's exposition of reduction. For 
example, Husserl could not quite separate the purely transcendental sense of 
the epoche from the natural. The understanding of epoche as neutralisation of 
a belief originates from the intra-worldly situation, and yet Husserl continued 
to speak of neutralising the total world-belief! 
Landgrebe also rejects the conception of reduction as a merely preparatory 
methodological step. With his historically oriented approach, he grounds the 
necessity of reduction in our mode of existence together with our historical 
situation. 17 Landgrebe therefore concedes that Heidegger's critique of the 
reduction as a renewal of epistemological Cartesianism was too hasty, for-
as Landgrebe understands it - the bracket lets the world stay within the 
brackets, and at the same time reveals the ego not as a self-enclosed 
immanence but as intersubjectivity. In fact, as he insists later on, the 
transcendental subjectivity that is laid bare through the reduction should not 
properly be called subjectivity. It is rather the inseparable unity of world 
experiencing and its correlate, the experienced world, within which unity the 
distinction between subject and object, inner and outer, is after all possible.1 8 
v 
How are we to understand "constitution?" Again, Landgrebe and Fink have 
set the stage for much discussion in the literature on the concept of 
constitution. In his 1933 essay, Fink had distinguished between three stages in 
our understanding of one and the same intentional life: the psychic intention 
(mental act understood as an event in the natural world) is receptive, the 
transcendental act-intentionality is neither fully receptive nor creative and in 
that sense 
is 
indeterminate, while the transcendental constituting 
intentionality is creative and productive. 19 In the essay on operative concepts, 
Fink appears to have somewhat modified his position: now he distinguishes 
between a naive sense of "constitution" and a transcendental sense. In the 
naive sense, constitution is putting together (Zusammenstellung); in the 
transcendental sense, it is performance (Leistung). Fink also distinguishes 
between two ways of understanding the concept of "performance": it may be 
taken as a making or production (which he calls the rough meaning) or it may 
be understood in the sense in which one says "An orator performed 
beautifully" (which, Fink regards as the subtle meaning). Fink's main point is 
12 
that H usserlfinds the concept of "constitution "in its ordinary use with regard 
to the mundane domain, and gives it a transcendental sense. The relation of 
the transcendental sense to the mundane is not adequately clarified. If Fink's 
general thesis is correct. a complete clarification of such a concept is just not 
possible. It is one of those necessarily grey and shadowy areas which every 
philosophy generates; an operative concept which Husser! sought, without 
complete success, to thematise and illuminate. Husserl's concept of 
constitution, then, is beyond the alternatives of Erzeugen and Vernehmen. 
What it is, is not clear and cannot be made clear. 
Funke agrees with this. When we describe constitution in mundane 
language, he writes, that can only be analogical. Actually, constitution is a 
relation (?) between the pre-mundane and the mundane. It is "not a mundane, 
methodical construction, not a demiurge's fabrication and not a mystical 
creation ex nihilo. "20 The mundane distinction between activity and passivity 
does not apply to the pre-mundane. 
One of the conceptual difficulties in interpreting H usserl at this point 
concerns the passivity-activity distinction in his philosophy. Not only are 
both Fink and Funke aware that in some way this distinction, taken from 
mundane discourse, needs to be overcome in transcendental philosophy, even 
Jean Wahl in his essay on Experience and Judgment, included in the present 
volume, recognises that Husser! tends to relativise that distinction. Husserl, 
on Wahl's reading of the text, knows of a passivity prior to act, but also of a 
passivity within an act; at the same time, Wahl thinks, Husserl assigns a role 
to activity within the passive doxa. On Wahl's own view, of course - since he 
welcomes what he reads as Husserl's progress towards empiricism - it is more 
in consonance with empiricism to regard activity as a higher stage of passivity, 
rather than - as I think, Leibnitz did - taking passivity as a low degree of 
activity. There is no doubt - and in this Wahl is certainly right - that the 
priority of passivity, of the ideas of "passive synthesis," and "passive genesis" 
for example, emerges slowly and late in Husserl's thought. What Wahl 
overlooks - and this is pointed out by Landgrebe in his letter to Wahl, 
translated for this volume - is that "receptivity" and "passivity" are not to be 
confused, so that whereas receptivity, for Husserl, is a lower level of 
spontaneity, passivity is not. 
Landgrebe's own contribution to our understanding of the problem 
of constitution lies in a distinction that he draws between methodological and 
idealistic, metaphysical interpretations. The idealistic interpretation proceeds 
on the understanding of consciousness as a region of absolute Being (in itself. 
an inauthentic mode of speech) and of constitution as a positing of the world 
within and by transcendental sUbjectivity. The methodological, or also called 
by him critical-transcendental understanding, takes the idea of correlation as 
fundamental and irreducible and then means by "constitution" the "bringing 
to appearance of entities. ''21 This is not very far from Funke's interpretation: 
13 
epoche, Funke writes, consists in the correlation between subjective 
performances and objective phenomena together with the fundamental 
historicity of rational-critical consciousness.22 (Note that the novelty of 
Funke's approach lies not so much in the emphasis on correlation or 
historicity, as on the rational-critical aspect.) And he writes in his 
contribution to the present volume that constitution is "the appearance of 
sense in its appearing, or the autonomous occurring ofthat which shows itself 
from itself." 
Given, then, these two understandings of constitution - the methodological 
and the idealistic, metaphysical - Landgrebe further contends that Husserl 
never resolved this tension to satisfaction; that while from the very beginning 
the idealistic tinge was there he also sought to overcome it. Taking up, as a 
concrete example, the question of the distinction between nature and spirit as 
regions of being, Landgrebe argues how, as Husserl moved from one 
conception of nature to another, he also moved from the methodological to 
the idealistic understanding of constitution. And, he raises the fundamental 
issue which every idealism has to face: if all nature (understood as the 
founding region) is constituted, can the "positing" act of consciousness 
account for sensation and the phenomenon of receptivity associated with 
sensation? We indeed do appear to reach a limit of constitution as we come to 
the problem of sensation. If the hyle is expelled from consciousness, the latter 
does not become Sartrean pure nothingness. On the contrary, corporeality 
and kinaesthesis are located within the structure of transcendental 
subjectivity, so that Landgrebe could attempt to explain sensation as a mode 
of being-in-the-world entirely on the basis of Husserlian concepts and 
without making explicit use of Heideggerian Daseinsanalytik. 23 It is in the 
light of this and of the distinction between "passivity" and "receptivity" that 
Wahl's reading of Husserl's Experience and Judgment needs to be appraised. 
It is important also to bear in mind - in view of the fact that Wahl ascribes to 
Experience and Judgment not only an empiricism but also a realism - that the 
Experience and Judgment begins with, and moves within, the horizon set free 
by phenomenological reduction. 
VI 
What happens to the concept of "a priori"? The concept of "a priori" does not 
coincide with that of essence. All essences are a priori insofar as they not only 
ground universal and necessary truths, but also are possible objects of non-
sensible intuition. Let us first see how the Husserlian concept of essence is 
understood in these essays. When Fink distinguishes between two concepts of 
essence, pre-philosophical and philosophical, or when he asserts that the 
Husserlian essence, unlike the traditional concept of essence as the ground of 
14 
appearances, is the invariant sense - he is indicating but not explicitly 
articulating an important distinction which often gets blurred in the writings 
of Husserl himself as well as his commentators, namely, the distinction 
between essence and sense, the former being an antic concept and the latter a 
truly phenomenological concept. In how strongly an ontological sense, then, 
are we to understand Husser!'s essentialism? My own preference is to say 
something like this: Husser! did believe that there are essences as much as there 
are real individual things. What he tried to clarify is the sense of the being of 
essences (and the sense of being of individual things as also the sense of Being 
in general). Neither traditional realism nor conceptualism did justice to that 
problem.24 This of course led to his thesis about eidetic intuition and about 
the analogy between empirical intuition and eidetic intuition. The analogy is 
not valid in all respects; no analogy is. It is important to see both in what 
respects the analogy holds good and in what respects it does not.25 Once we 
see both sides of the picture, a likely ontological naivety with regard to 
essences gets corrected and balanced by a critical understanding of their 
function. 
It is to the need for such an understanding that Landgrebe, Wahl, as well as 
Pentzopoulou-Valalas (in an essay specifically concerned with the a priori 
and the eidos in Husserl) draw our attention. Landgrebe has been long since 
emphasising that H usserlian essences should not be construed as constituting 
a region of metaphysical entities; they rather provide the horizon of 
possibilities of comprehension of subjectivity as transcendental.26 For 
Landgrebe, regional distinctions of being (and so the essences of such regions) 
articulate historically accomplished interpretations and so provide the 
guiding principles for investigating back to the constituting performances of 
transcendental SUbjectivity. Likewise, the "free variation" which is supposed 
to lead to eidetic intuition of essences has, for Landgrebe, no other sense than 
articulating the possibilities of the constituting consciousness. To say that to 
comprehend and understand an individual one needs to grasp its essence 
means then no more than that only through pure possibilities (of variation) 
can the actual, factually constituted world be made intelligible in its horizons 
and limits. 
Merleau-Ponty has written, in a well-known passage, that "the essence is 
here not the end, but a means," that philosophy "requires the field of ideality 
in order to become acquainted with and to prevail over its facticity" and 
therefore phenomenology at the end puts essences back into existence.27 This 
is true for all three, Landgrebe, Pentzopoulou-Valalas and Wahl, in different 
senses though, and no one of them agrees entirely with Merleau-Ponty's 
perception of the situation. For Landgrebe, Husser! maintains the primacy of 
the factual, the transcendental fact, which is none other than the 
transcendental field of experience (not to be construed as an eidos). For 
Pentzopoulou-Valalas, the Husserlian essence has a purely epistemological, 
15 
non-ontological sense; the material essence, for example, is the possibly a 
posteriori, the a priori ot a posteriori, the possible perception, so that a 
posteriori continues to have a central position in Husserl's thinking. Jean 
Wahl (whom Merleau-Ponty accuses of wrongly ascribing to Husserl a 
separation of essences from existence28) finds in the Experience and 
Judgment a considerable modification of the earlier doctrine of essences in 
the direction of empiricism and an "ante-predicative realism." 
All this is true. But if Husserl's essentialism finds its complement in his 
empiricism, that is because H usserl 's concept of "experience," as Landgrebe 
has seen more clearly than most commentators, makes the fact-essence 
distinction ultimately untenable, and also because transcendental thinking in 
the long run comes to terms with a last dimension of facticity in the 
historically unfolding life of consciousness. Nevertheless, the concept of a 
priori, released from the restrictions of the concept of eidos, remains 
sovereign. Even if transcendental subjectivity is not itself an eidos (although 
one can speak of an eidos "transcendental ego"), it nevertheless has a priori 
structures. The one a priori structure which comprehends all others is the so-
called correlation a priori- the correlation between the a priori of 
consciousness and the a priori of being. This noetic-noematic correlation 
comprehends within itself all that is philosophically relevant from pre-
phenomenological ontology. 
A last feature of the Husserlian thought about the a priori, particularly 
when placed against the background of the tradition, may be found in two 
conceptions: one to be found in the earlier writings, especially in the Ideas I, 
and the other in the Crisis of the late period. The former is the idea of an 
individual's own essence, the latter is the idea of the a priori of history as a 
historical a priori. Both point to what Eley has recently called the crisis of the 
a priori: 29 the a priori does not any longer function as logical universality, 
but is taken to characterise the individual in its unique individuality. 
Landgrebe's second essay in this volume takes up the question ofthe historical 
a priori of the lifeworld. The lifeworld, as Landgrebe understands it, is the 
historical world. The a priori ot the lifeworld must be the condition of the 
possibility of history as a science as well as of the prescientific experience of 
history. What makes it possible that our lifeworld is historical world? In trying 
to answer this question, Landgrebe wants to go back to the "primal evidences" 
in "the innermost self-experience of reflecting transcendental subjectivity," 
evidences belonging to the "living present" in which transcendental 
subjectivity as a flux is constituted. But if the a priori of history is to be found 
in the "living present," it can signify the invariant but not what is 
comprehended in its totality. The defacto reflecting subjectivity must always 
transcend itself; as free, "open reason," it cannot be, in all its possibilities, 
grasped in advance. In this sense, for Landgrebe, the a priori of history is also 
a historical a priori. One still may ask: why not say that the historical is an open 
16 
process with no invariant content, but always made possible by an invariant 
form, the formal structure of the inner time consciousness? If that is so, how 
are we to understand the claim that this invariant form itself is historical? 
VII 
In this review of the problems, issues and interpretative points of view, we are 
encountering, again and again, several oppositions: empiricism-rationalism, 
static constitution and genetic constitution, a-historicity and historicity of 
transcendental subjectivity. Gerhard Funke in many ways has struggled to work 
out an almost unique interpretation of phenomenology in which these 
oppositions have been allotted their rightful places. To understand Funke's 
reading of Husser!, we need to go beyond the essay translated for this volume 
and refer to his two earlier books to which references have already been made 
in this introduction. 
Funke wants to correct the one-sided scheme of a thoroughgoing 
object-intentional structure of consciousness. Consciousness is not merely 
intentionally directed towards its object, but also appears to itself, is 
conscious of itself. The latter aspect, i.e., self-consciousness, is also an 
intentionality, but should not be construed as though it were a case of act-
intentionality. In other words, the acts present themselves to themselves 
immediately as flowing, streaming without themselves being objectified and 
intended. This is what Sartre has called the translucency of pre-reflective 
consciousness. In their object-intentional aspect, the acts constitute objective 
senses, noemata, which are a-historical unities, and, in the long run, the world 
as nexus of such senses. But in their aspect as subjective appearings (Funke 
uses the word "Phansis" for this aspect), the conscious experiences generate 
habitualities. It is in such habitualities that the ego has its genesis. This is the 
concrete monadic ego. The concrete ego is thus constituted, its constitution 
being a sort of auto-genesis, radically different from the constitution of 
noemata. Thus the acts refer, on the one hand, to the noemata they constitute, 
and, on the other, to the ego which has its genesis in the habitualities founded 
on acts as subjective experiencings. Both the world (as a noematic structure) 
and the concrete monadic ego as the substrate of habitualities are 
transcendent to the acts regarded as sUbjective experiencings. The 
transcendental is then that which fully surpasses both transcendencies and 
makes them possible. 30 
Of these two transcendencies, the noemata are a-historical, but the ego is a 
historically self-constituting unity. For Funke, it is not "man" or "culture" 
that is genuinely historical, but the ego. The stream of acts, or in Funke's 
language, of appearings (of the appearances), regarded as constituting, is 
transcendental subjectivity of the flux. Transcendental consciousness is 
17 
nothing but everyday consciousness with its I-world structure, with the 
difference that unlike everyday consciousness it does not naively posit I and 
world as existents. It is not clear though, from Funke's account, how for him 
transcendental ego is different from the concrete monadic ego. It is most 
likely that he regards the same concrete monadic ego as both empirical and 
transcendental. But then the concept of "transcendental" would not coincide 
with that of "constituting," for the ego is, on this theory, constituted even if its 
constitution is auto-constitution. 
What, however, is most striking about Funke's understanding of 
phenomenology is the centrality he accords to the ideas of "reason" and 
"criticism." Earlier, I distinguished between a transcendental philosophy 
which, in the Kantian spirit, seeks to enquire into the conditions of validity or 
truth, and which also itself may, in the Platonic spirit, aim at arriving at a 
body of apodictic, founding truths, and a transcendental philosophy which 
limits itself to the more modest task of clarification of the constitution of 
meanings. 3! Funke's conception of phenomenology has something in 
common with both. Unlike the Platonic enterprise, phenomenology, 
according to Funke, is not a metaphysics but a method. But unlike the sort of 
phenomenology which limits itself to the clarification of sense, Funke, in the 
true Kantian spirit, regards it as the task of a phenomenological philosophy to 
critically validate all truth claims. In the long run, all validation and all 
criticism have to appeal to consciousness. Consciousness is reason.32 Such an 
identification of consciousness with reason seems incompatible with the 
distinction which one cannot overlook between the naive, positing 
consciousness and critical, reflecting consciousness. I think what Funke 
means is that the latter alone is the rational consciousness. Critical 
phenomenology, then, cannot be merely descriptive. As a science, it has to 
look for the grounding structures (Begrundungszusammenhiinge). These 
ultimately grounding structures are the noetic-noematic correlation structures. 
The sort of grounding, namely, which we can expect phenomenology to 
provide, would answer the question of why on a definite level of 
consciousness, something must appear to be self-evident. 33 
Although Funke wants phenomenology to critically validate all truth-
claims, he does not admit any given truth claim to be final. A 
phenomenological philosophy cannot stop with any position. It shall 
overcome all positions by showing, critically, how those positions are 
correlates of specific positional acts. Thus phenomenology shall transcend all 
naive philosophising. It shall continue to be critical, and shall not end up in a 
metaphysics. One of Funke's valuable contributions lies in cautioning us 
against accepting any given as ultimate. This is especially worth heeding 
when it comes to the lifeworld. For many phenomenologists, Husserl rightly 
reached here, in his discovery of the lifeworld, the last source of all evidences, 
the ultimate fact, as it were. Funke warns us against the tendency to 
18 
dogmatise the positing of the lifeworld. It appears as if he is providing an 
insight which ought to counterbalance some of Landgrebe's seeming 
exaggerations. Interpreters who absolutise the lifeworld forget that 
phenomenological evidence is possible only within the correlation structure. 34 
Critical thinking rules out the possibility of absolutising any particular mode 
of understanding or any particular world. If the lifeworldly reason lives only 
in the naivety of convictions, phenomenological reason seeks to go beyond all 
convictions. 
Thus, transcendental subjectivity, as the critical reason, goes beyond all 
positions and is in this sense historical reason. This conclusion is not very far 
from Landgrebe's, in spite of Funke's use of the language of "consciousness" 
and rejection of all facticity including the facticity of the lifeworld.35 
VIII 
If this introductory essay does not review in great detail Toulemont's study on 
Husserl's thoughts on the constitution of the social, that is not because its 
importance for understanding H usserl is lesser than that of the other essays 
in this volume. On the contrary, Toulemont's study, appearing long before 
the publication of the Husserlian volumes devoted to the problem of 
intersubjectivity,36 provided one of the very few accesses to the rich contents 
of that H usserlian Nachlass. We learn from Toulemont that intersubjectivity, 
by itself, though necessary, is yet not sufficient for the constitution of 
sociality. Besides intersubjectivity, sociality requires communication, a 
common perceptual world, community of wills, willed ends and of plans of 
work, interpenetration of affective lives and socialisation of rational life. 
Whereas these concern the attentive consciousness restricted to the horizon of 
its temporal actuality, full constitution of the social requires union across 
time in the form of communicable "acquisitions" and traces. Husserl was led 
to the idea of community as "a person of a higher order. "I t is well known that 
a similar conception in Scheler had been severely criticised by Hartmann, and 
also that Schutz had been critical of Husserl's ideas in this regard. Toulemont 
rightly warns us against reading Husserl here as an organicist thinker. 
Husserl's attempt to maintain a parallelism between individual consciousness 
and collective consciousness does not stand up against critical scrutiny. Can it 
be said that the essence of the social, as contradistinguished from the 
individual, lies in this that whereas the individual is "present" to himself, the 
society is "appresented" to its members and cannot be grasped in direct 
experience? This is consistent with Husserl's egological stance in the 
Cartesian Meditations and his idea of "analogical transfer" of one's own 
consciousness to the other. Toulemont rejects both: more in accord with 
Scheler, he insists that the consciousness of the other is more direct than one's 
19 
own. The only plausible point of distinction between individual and society 
gives way, and one then needs to revise the very individualistic starting point 
of H usserl's thinking on the social. These are challenging thoughts, and it is to 
be hoped that they will provoke readers to what can only be a painstaking but 
immensely rewarding experience -
viz. read the three volumes of 
intersubjectivity papers. We need not any longe~ depend solely on the fifth 
Cartesian Meditation to assess Husserl's thoughts on this problem. To what 
extent these newly accessible materials are going to influence our 
understanding of transcendental phenomenology is quite another question. 
NOTES 
1. For a discussion of this relationship, see my "'Life-world' and 'A priori' in 
H ussert's Later Thought," in Tymieniecka, ed., Analecta Husserliana, II 1(1974), 
46-65, esp. 46-47 and 63-64. 
2. G. Funke, Zur transzendentalen Phanomenologie (Bonn: Bouvier, 1957), p. 25. 
3. G. Funke, Phanomenologie-Metaph.1'sik oder Methode? (Bonn: Bouvier, 1966), 
p. 110. 
4. Ibid., p. 201. 
5. L. Landgrebe, "Husserls Phanomenologie und die Motive zu ihrer Umbildung," 
in L. Landgrebe, Der Weg der Phiinomenologie (Giitersloh: Gerd Mohn, 1963). 
6. L. Landgrebe, "Das Problem der Geschichtlichkeit des Lebens und die 
Phanomenologie Husserls." in L. Landgrebe. Phdnomenologie und Geschichte 
(Giitersloh: Gerd Mohn. 1968). esp. p. 30. 
7. Ibid .. p. 32. 
8. L. 
Landgrebe. "Das Problem der transzendentalen Wissenschaft vom 
Lebenswe1tlichen Apriori," in Phdnomenologie und Geschichte. esp. p. 166. (This 
volume. pp. 152-71; esp. p. 170. 
9. H. Wagner. "Kritische Bemerkungen zu Husserls Nachlass," Philosophische 
Rundschau (1953.54): 1-22.93-123. 
10. D. Henrich. "Uber die Grundlagen von Husserls Kritik der philosophischen 
Tradition." Philosophische Rundschau 6 (1958): 1-26. 
II. Zur transzendentalen Phanomenologie, pp. 24, 40. 
12. L. Landgrebe. "Husserls Abschied vom Cartesianismus," III Der Weg der 
Phdnomenologie. p. 174 ff. 
13. I have recently emphasized this distinction in "Hussert's Transcendental 
Phenomenology and Essentialism," Review of Metaphysics 32 (1978). 
14. Cpo my "Husserl's Transcendental Phenomenology and Essentialism." 
15. E. Fink. "Die phiinomenologische Philosophie Edmund Husserls in der 
gegenwartigen Kritik," Kant-Studien 38 (1933). Reprinted in Studien zur 
Phdnomenologie. 1930-1939 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966). 
16. Studien zur Phdnomenologie, p. 122. 
17. L. Landgrebe, "Phiinomenologische Bewusstseinsanalyse und Metaphysik." in 
Der Weg der Phdnomenologie, esp. p. 87 ff. 
18. Der Weg der Phanomenologie. p. 190. 
19. Studien zur Phdnomen%gie. p. 143. 
20. Zur transzendentalen Phdnomenologie, p. 75. 
20 
21. See esp. Landgrebe's review of A. Gurwitsch's Field of Consciousness. In 
Philosophische Rundschau 8 (1960), esp. p. 307. 
22. Phdnomenologie-Metaphysik oder Methode, p. 131. 
23. L. Landgrehe. "Prinzipien der Lehre vom Empfinden." In Del' Weg del' 
Phdnomenologie. 
24. Cpo E. Husserl, Ideas. sect. 21 and 22. 
25. Cpo F. Kersten, "The Occasion and Novelty of Husserl's Phenomenology of 
Essence," in Phenomenological Per.lpectives. Essays in Honor of Herbert 
Spiegelberg (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 1975); and J. Konig, Der Begri/f'der 
Intuition (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1926). 
26. Phdnomenologie und Geschichte, p. 32 ff. 
27. M. Merieau-Ponty. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith (New York: 
Humanities, 1962). Preface. 
28. Ibid., p. xv. 
29. Eley. Die Krisi.\ des Apriori bei Edmund Husser! (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
1962) 
30. Cpo this volume, esp. p. 86. 
31. Cpo my "Husserl's Transcendental Phenomenology and Essentialism." 
32. Zur transzendentalen Phdnomen%gie, p. 31. 
33. Phiinomenologie-Metaphysik oder Methode. p. 117. 
34. Ibid .. p. 101. 
35. Cpo my "Consciousness and Life-World," Social Research (Spring 1975), pp. 
147-66, for further comments on this issue. 
36. E. Husserl, Zur Phiinomen%gie del' Intersubjektil'itiit (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1973). 
THE PROBLEM OF THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF EDMUND 
HUSSERLI, * 
EUGEN FINK 
1. The Inquiry into the Problem of Phenomenology as a 
Conditioned Interpretation 
In order to present the guiding, fundamental problem of a documented 
philosophy, it is appropriate that one Iturn only to the documents. The texts 
must provide the basis for interpretation, and thus the fundamental question 
must be elicited from them. However,just how this question is included in the 
texts cannot always be univocally ascertained. 
The problem of a philosophy need not be identical with the particular 
questions with which its literature begins, with, therefore, the situation which 
belongs to a philosophy when it begins, or with the predominant, motivating 
questions which remain with a philosophy throughout its development. The 
problem need not even be properly formulated. It can have an effect prior to 
its reflective formulation in all of the particular questions, it can stand behind 
all of the individual motivations of thought as the driving motive. 
If provisional, later reworked stages of a philosopher's development are 
involved in his own understanding of his thought, uncertainty regarding the 
fundamental problem of his philosophy remains even where the author 
formulates this problem. 
Given that access to the fundammtal question of phenomenology is 
uncertain, the indication of the problem of Edmund Husserl's 
phenomenology can only be an interpretation that concedes this risk from the 
start. 
The questions concerning the sense-formations of mathematics and logic, 
the questions with which Husserl's phenomenological writings begin, are not 
the genuine problem of phenomenology. On the contrary. these questions, 
though they form a constant and predominant theme, first acquire their 
philosophical significance within the horizon of the fundamental problem. 
On the other hand, Husserl for the most part mainly understood his own 
project in terms of the particular questions of the respective texts. In addition, 
*Translated by Robert M. Harlan from "Das Problem der Phanomenologie 
Edmund Husserls," in Studien zur Phiinomenologie (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1966), pp. 179-233; originally published in Revue internationale de philosophie, 2 
(1939), pp. 236-70. 
21 
22 
this understanding occasionally involved later. reworked stages in his 
development. or above all concerned the phenomenological method. 
Methods, however, do not stand on their own in the realm of philosophy: they 
are demanded by and wrested from problems. One cannot grasp the driving 
problem of a philosophy from its method. Rather. it is the other way around: 
the sense of the method is determined by the problem. 
Therefore. when the texts contain the problem more between the lines than 
in them, as is the case in Husserl's phenomenology, the risk of an 
interpretation lies in one's seeking the essential, fundamental question which 
forms the inner beginning of a philosophy, and hence, which makes possible 
the question's textual documentation, from an understanding of the texts 
gained merely by following them. The concept of the "risk" of an 
interpretation is sharpened when what it means to "construct a philosophical 
problem" is expressly discussed. 
The problem of a philosophy is the philosophy's fundamental question. a 
question that constantly radicalizes itself. In the active projection and inner 
development of this question, a new dimension of possible knowledge is 
formed, and through this question the establishment and grounding of a 
philosophy occurs. This means, however, that "problem" in the philosophical 
sense is not a simply namable and formulatable expecting-to-know 
[ Wissenausstand] on the basis of a path to knowledge already taken by man. 
"Expecting-to-know" here does not mean an objective not-being-present of 
determinate knowledge but. rather, the sUbjective modes of knowing that 
which is not yet known about the existent [Seiendem]. Expecting-to-know is 
the well-known phenomenon of knowing about knowledge that is lacking. On 
the basis of his pre-philosophical understanding of the world, on the ground 
of the commonly understood, public explication of the existent r des 
Seienden] man is not related cognitively simply to actually given things. In 
addition, he can always see that a thing is missing and search for the thing as 
well as see that knowledge about a thing is lacking and search for that 
knowledge. For man, the style of givenness of things is characterized by a 
relativity that already predelineates the direction for the augmentation of his 
knowledge about things. Human knowing has already embedded paths which 
enable progress in knowledge, progress in the sense of an always "more 
exact," "more complete" and "more systematic" determination of things. 
Progress in knowledge is always guided by the horizon of the known 
expecting-to-know. What is commonly called positive "science" is progress 
along the pregiven paths to knowledge which vastly exceeds everyday 
knowledge. Positive-scientific knowledge [Erkenntnisse] is a refinement of 
knowledge, at first of pre-scientific acquaintance [Kenntnisse]. The botanist 
determines plants which were known prior to all science within a progressing 
body of knowledge that was accomplished by the cognitive work of 
23 
generations of investigators. Within the domain of a progressing body of 
knowledge, knowledge that advances along paths, "problems" are 
expectings-to-know whose sense-structure is determined by the fixed identity 
of the idea of knowledge with regard both to the already known and the not 
yet known. To the identity [Gleichheit] with regard to the idea of knowledge 
corresponds an identity with regard to the idea of the existent. "Progress" in 
knowledge, as an augmentation of an already given body of knowledge with 
respect to extent, fullness and certainty, takes place on the ground of afixed 
idea of the existent. The existent qua existent and the nature of truth are 
accepted as known and, as a result ofth!is self-evident knownness, as constant. 
In this way, the determinate existent is determined, and ever more 
differentiated truths are sought. The constancy and fixity ofthefundamental 
ideas of the existent and truth constitute the basis of human knowledge. 
Philosophy is the shaking of the ground which bears human familiarity 
with the existent, the shaking of the basis which forms the presupposition for 
the progressive augmentation of knowledge, the unsettling of the foundations 
of knowledge and the questioning of the existent qua existent and the nature 
of truth. Therefore, problem in the philosophical sense is not an expecting-to-
know on the basis of a path to knowledge but, rather, the formation of an 
expecting-to-know. It is the emergence of the necessity that we must seek 
knowingly where everything has apparently been found, where everything is 
known and questionless. In this context, problem means that what is obvious 
becomes questionable. 
Problems in the philosophical sense, however, are not arbitrary doubts 
about what is constant, doubts that arise from caprice, from the search for 
doubts or from the mere mistrust of the human mind. Man's arbitrariness 
gives way before philosophy. Rather, philosophy is an "experience"that man 
has of himself and the existent. The origin of philosophical problems is 
wonder.2 
Astonishment descends upon man; it is essentially something that befalls 
him [ein Widerfahrnis]. What was obvious is no longer obvious. What was 
common becomes uncommon. However, what was obvious does not simply 
change into something with thefamiliar manner ofthe non-obvious, a simple 
turning of the obvious into its opposite. In astonishment, rather, the known 
becomes unknown in as yet unknown sense, the familiar becomes unfamiliar 
in an unfamiliar sense. The valid, the certain and the existent become invalid, 
uncertain and nothing in an alien and alienating way. The constant and 
unquestioned become, in just this constancy and unquestionableness, 
transitory and questionable. In wonder, the unsettling idea of a genuine mode 
of knowing the existent suddenly emerges from beneath the ordered, familiar 
world in which we are at home and about which we have fixed meanings 
concerning things, man and God, meanings which make certainty in life 
24 
possible. Therefore, a peculiar inversion occurs: what had previously been 
held to be the "existent" becomes a mere illusion. ]n astonishment, the 
"inverted world" of philosophy arises. 
The essential structure of astonishment is indicated by the Greek work 
"ekplexiS.'" Astonishment is a forcing out: it forces man out of that 
fundamental way of life, one oflaziness and metaphysical indolence, in which 
he has ceased to question the existent qua existent. Wonder dislodges man 
from the prejudice of everyday, publicly pregiven, traditional and worn out 
familiarity with the existent, drives him from the already authorized and 
expressly explicated interpretation of the sense of the world and into the 
creative poverty of not yet knowing what the existent is. Astonishment is 
essentially dis-placing in so far as it removes man from prejUdice, familiarity 
and certainty. The "ekplektic," dis-placing structure of astonishment refers to 
its proximity to the dispositions and experiences that bring man home in the 
depth of his essence. It refers to its proximity to dread, fear, horror and 
displacement as well as to that great self-movement of man which Nietzsche 
entitled "the great longing." 
Astonishment, however, is in no way merely a "disposition," a feeling. 
Rather, it is the fundamental disposition of pure thought; it is original theory. 
A change and transformation of knowing takes place in wonder in that 
knowledge of the existent which is already at hand is devalued to mere 
opinion and the nature of knowing is altered. Any theory, any knowing 
relation between man and the existent is not original if what the existent as 
such and the nature of truth are is already decided. It is not original if the 
original formation of the ideas of "existent" and "truth," if the" hypothesis, ,,b 
the foundation of the possibility of knowledge of the existent has already 
occurred, whether through a lengthy effort belonging to the past of human 
spirit or through the inconspicuous obviousness of the "natural world-view." 
Astonishment is original theory because man suffers the experience of a 
breakdown of his traditional knowledge, a breakdown of his pre-
acquaintance with the world and things, and that as a result a new confronting 
of the existent and a new projection of the senses of "being" and "truth" 
become necessary. In turning towards the existent with astonishment, man is 
as it were primevally open to the world once again, he finds himself in the 
dawn of a new day of the world in which he himself and everything that is 
begins to appear in a new light. The whole of the existent dawns upon him 
anew. 
Our speaking of a "new projection" and a "new dawning" does not mean, 
however, that it lies within the power and free choice of man to proclaim 
whatever he pleases to be "existent," so that finally being and truth are 
presented as mere public conventions. The true freedom of human spirit is the 
self-determination to knowingly accept what is beyond all human power, an 
allowing itself to endure the might of the truly existent. This freedom is a 
25 
struggle over fundamental concepts such as "being," "being-in-itself," 
"appearance," and the like, concepts with which man attempts to illuminate 
the concealed ness of the existent. The transformation of the fundamental 
concepts which astonishment forces is not a transformation of the existent 
itself. Rather, it is a shift of the idea of the "existent" within human spirit. 
What the existent itself is beyond the human idea of it is the motivating 
uncertainty in which consists the restlessness of human spirit. 
In astonishment, the existent is manifested in a new, original way that 
interrupts the fixity of the established explication of being and commences 
the "hunt for the existent." As something that befalls man, astonishment is a 
visitation that descends upon him and in which he, by surrendering to it, also 
visits the ground of things. 
If the origin of a philosophical problem lies essentially in astonishment, 
then its emergence from astonishment is not a passive occurrence. Rather, the 
problem becomes actual by man's taking astonishment up voluntarily, by 
astonishment's being sustained and developed by the awakening force of 
conceptual cognition. The extent of the creative force of wonder ultimately 
determines the rank and achievement of a philosophy and determines the 
possible greatness of man in the field of metaphysics. However, the projection 
of the problem, the essential, fundamental act of a philosophy, is not only the 
formulation of the question but the development of the question which 
astonishes as well. The "radicality" of a philosophy lies in the radicalization of 
its problem. 
I t is precisely with respect to the indicated sense-structure of philosophical 
problems that the attempt to understand a documented philosophy by 
beginning with its fundamental question is to be characterized as a 
conditioned interpretation. The interpretation's being conditioned lies in the 
indelible questionableness of any reconstruction of an original projection of 
the problem. Moreover, the interpretor cannot be certain if he actually 
succeeds in entering into the question of a philosophy in the process of his 
inquiry. However, the decisive way in which his endeavor is conditioned is that 
it is impossible to repeat the constant, self-radicalizing movement of the 
problem's development, the movement which is the elaboration of the 
fundamental question and which begins from the question. The interpretor 
abstracts as it were from the inner development of the problem, from the 
history of its radicalization. He is able only to indicate this development by a 
"construction" of its essential stages. 
Our interpretation of the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl is guided by 
the following constructive sketch of the phenomenological problematic: 
A. The existent as phenomenon; B. The idea of an intentional analytic; C. The 
radical reflection; D. Science and life-world; E. The theory of the natural 
attitude; F. The theory of the phenomenological reduction; G. The theory of 
constitution; H. The fundamental problem.c 
26 
A. THE EXISTENT AS PHENOMENON 
2. 
"To the Things Themselves" 
The interpretation of H usserl's phenomenology on the basis of the 
fundamental problem which motivates it must begin by attempting to 
characterize the way in which the wonder which forms the problem is 
formulated. Thus, it is of decisive importance that the essential universality of 
this formulation be shown and that a natural misunderstanding be prevented. 
At first it may appear both clear and plausible that, similar to the way that 
an answer which comes to mind permits a motivated inference back to a 
preceding question, the so-called theme of a philosophy provides guidance 
for determining the problem which grounds it. Does not the "theme" 
designate the domain of the existent which constitutes the horizon of what is 
wondered about? Is phenomenology not a science of subjectivity? Is its 
thematic field not the subjective life and its fundamental characteristic, 
intentionality? Is its question, then, not one concerning the essence of the 
subject? 
To be sure, these determinations are not totally false. However, they are 
false in that phenomenology, like the positive sciences, is assumed to be 
characterized by its theme. Theme in the context of the positive sciences and 
"theme" in the context of philosophy have completely different senses. 
The formulation of a positive science, whether it is an empirical or a priori 
science, takes place in the selection of its theme. In fact, it takes place in such a 
way that a determinate domain of the existent which is already given and 
already known in its typicality is madc the theme of a unitary, theoretical 
determination. Therefore, what essentially determines the unity of a science is 
the connected unity of the homogenous existent within this science's domain of 
objects, whether the science treats a genus of independent existents (such as 
animals, plants), a layer [Schicht] common to all genera of independent entities 
(res extensa) or the material and formal structures in the existent (essence, 
number, etc.). Positive science is necessarily "specific science"- that is, a 
limited and restricted science of a limited and restricted region ofthe existent: 
the existent as number, as spatial shape, as materiality, as plant, as animal, 
etc. The articulation of the existent into the regions of its whatness, however, 
is not an accomplishment of the positive sciences. Rather, the sciences find 
such an articulation already there and they conform to the given distribution 
of the diverse existent in their formulation. Positive science has its "positum," 
its "posited," in advance; namely, the existent as this and that. It arises from 
an attitude of man in which is not asked what the existent qua existent is; 
rather, the inquiry has already proceeded to the existent as a determinate 
existent belonging to a region. 
Therefore, the position that a characterization of a positive science is 
provided by its theme is justified. The methods of a science may be arduous and 
27 
accessible only with difficulty. However, the region of its research, that with 
which it deals and that which it treats, is the most understandable and best 
known aspect of the science, no matter how much this pregiven knowledge of 
the thematic of a positive science may be deepened in the course of its 
research. 
Because philosophy is not a specific science, every endeavor to acquire 
simple, understandable information regarding that with which it deals by 
direct references to its "theme" fails. If, in an attempt to understand a 
philosophy, the "theme" is taken to be simply an already known region of the 
existent, to be a limited field of specific, theoretical interest, then philosophy 
has already been abandoned and has covertly become a specific science. If one 
takes, for example, Husserl's phenomenology to be a science of consciousness 
and understands the concept of "consciousness" in the commonly understood 
sense as one part of the psychic domain, then phenomenology is and remains 
psychology, a specific science, or perhaps only a psychological discipline, 
however much phenomenology may be differentiated from a naturalistic, 
external psychology. 
If philosophy actually originates in wonder, then it never ascends merely to 
the small and limited peculiarity of this or that puzzling or noteworthy 
phenomenon, but, rather, ascends to the peculiarity of the existent as a whole. 
Worldly wisdom originates in universal wondering about the world. This does 
not mean that philosophy is a compilation of all of the specific sciences, an 
encyclopedia as it were of the positive sciences. Such a sum of the specific 
sciences would still be "specific-scientific" with respect to its mode of 
knowing; that is, it would still approach the existent as the existent 
determined by its various regions. Furthermore, this means that the sum of 
the specific sciences is a theoretical determination of the combined totality of 
the existent which is divided into partial domains buy the specific positive 
sciences. However, both the distribution into domains and their combination 
take place on the basis of the existent qua existent, which as such remains 
presupposed without question. Domains and the totality of domains are 
essentially structures within the world. 
The cosmological concept of "world," which designates a problem of 
metaphysics, does not coincide with the physicalist concept of the universe as 
the totality of the world-domains of res corporea. "Universe" in the 
philosophical sense means the whole of the existent qua existent, the totality 
of all that "is" - a totality encompassing every domain, including the parts 
and the whole of each domain. 
The universality of philosophical problems signifies universal wonder: the 
profound astonishment over the fact that this and that, the known and the 
unknown, the great and the small, the simple and the combined, the like, the 
unlike, the lifeless and the living, the innumerable multiplicity of things, the 
heavens, land and sea, time and space, figure, and so forth all "are." 
28 
This total, all-encompassing wonder, however, does not refer to an 
expansion of what becomes questionable in the course of philosophical 
research, an incomprehensibility that subsequently broadens and ultimately 
reaches the "whole." Universal wonder is that which makes theformulation of 
a philosophy possible. 
This is what is not understood by those who attempt to work their way 
through to the problem by way of the philosophical "theme" - "theme" being 
taken at first in a limited sense. It is certainly the case that a central 
determination of a philosophy is given by its "theme." However, a question 
arises as to whether what one calls the theme can be understood 
straightforwardly or if the "theme" must itself be interpreted. In philosophy is 
the sense of the problem to be derived from the "theme" or the sense of the 
"theme" from the problem? Is Kant's Critique of Pure Reason an 
investigation of the human faculty of cognition, taken in its already known 
sense? Is it an investigation restricted to a determinate "domain "? Is it a theory 
of cognition, indifferent to whether it treats "facts" or "laws of sense",? Does it 
concern a restriction, understoodfrom the start, to a determinate, pregiven 
field, the human intellect, or is Kant's theory of knowledge one form of the 
question concerning the existent as a whole? Does Kant's philosophy become a 
theory of cognition, a critique of pure reason, in the process of answering the 
question "how are synthetic a priori judgments possible"'? And is this guiding 
question of Kant's not a question concerning the existent as such, a wonder 
about how the existent can be "true" prior to its being encountered by 
experience, about how it can be unconcealedly open in its whatness? Does it 
not become understandable only on the basis of the horizon of the 
metaphysical problem of a necessary connection between being and being 
true, of a relation between the "transcendentals" ens and verum, why Kant's 
transcendental philosophy is developed within the apparent confines of a 
critique of pure reason? 
Because the "theme" ofa philosophy must be understood on the basis of the 
problem standing behind it, and because the formulation ofthe problem rests 
precisely in the apparent narrowing of its universality, one's taking the 
thematic sphere of a philosophy to be a thematic sphere restricted to an 
already known sense, while neglecting the problem-horizon of the "theme,"is 
a misunderstanding that cuts off from the philosophy to be interpreted only 
the characteristic invoked by the philosophy's own "thematic" 
characterization. 
In order to exhibit the universality of the formulation of the fundamental 
question of phenomenology and to prevent the misunderstanding just 
indicated, the following question must be asked: What kind of wonder, 
directed in some way to the whole of the existent, is it that grounds Husserl's 
phenomenology in such a way that phenomenology develops into a science of 
subjectivity? Is H usserl's "thematization of intentionality" taken up in the 
29 
process of raising a question concerning the whole of the world, and is it 
developed from this question? Is it the problem of being - therefore, 
metaphysics - which is developed in his thought in such a way that, as a result 
of this development, "consciousness" becomes thematic? 
In fact this is the case. The science of consciousness does not arise for 
H usserl as something within the limits of psychology; for example, within the 
context of a classification of psychic phenomena. Husserl's turning towards 
the sphere of subjectivity does not have a limited, anthropological sense, as if 
only the domain of the psychic had philosophical significance. No, Husserl 
questions the existent in such a way that the resolution ofthis question leads 
him to an analytic of consciousness. 
It is the fundamental thesis of the interpretation undertaken here that the 
understanding of the sense of phenomenology as a philosophy is dependent 
upon the extent to which the problem of being is recognized as the horizon of 
the thematization of consciousness. 
The formulation of phenomenology can be concisely and convincingly 
declared by the often evoked slogan "to the things themselves." The literal 
sense of this slogan is by no means fortunate, for it can undergo either a 
harmless and unimportant or a most important interpretation. In any case, 
Husserl has set forth the problematic of phenomenology by this slogan. 
Taken simply, this imperative expresses nothing more than the 
methodological maxim of the theoretical way of thinking in general; i.e., aim 
to achieve "scientific objectivity" and "intellectual honesty." Therefore, it 
expresses that subjective principle of tmthfulness, a principle that is certainly 
a prerequisite for any true striving to know. But is it enough for us merely to 
let the things themselves have their say? Are we so sure that when we make an 
effort, we are or can be with the things themselves? Is it not a naive 
presupposition, an uncIarified, "obvious" assumption, to believe that what 
object and objectivity [Sache und Sachlichkeit] are is so well known that we 
merely have to focus upon them? The immediately familiar concept of 
honesty, of the "objectivity" of theoretical thinking, presupposes the 
unquestioned validity of a determinate idea of the existent. 
What is meant by the phenomenological sense of the slogan is a turning 
towards the "things" - i.e., to the existent - in which neither what the things 
are nor what constitutes the objectivity of knowledge or assertions about 
things has already been decided. What is meant is that turning towards which 
does not bring a fixed opinion with it but, rather, first decides what the 
existent is from the existent itself. 
To be sure, it is impossible to search for, to find and to inquire into what the 
existent as such genuinely is without the idea of the existent. This idea, 
"innate" to human spirit, is the precondition for the problem of being. There 
is a difference, however, between continually presupposing a traditional 
explication of the idea of the existent, an explication which appears to be 
30 
unquestionably valid, and attempting to work this idea out conceptually by 
going to the existent. 
The procedure by which we go to the existent, the existent being that 
towards which we are directed cognitively as the object of philosophical 
wonder, cannot be simply presupposed. ]n Husserl's phenomenology, rather, 
the movement of the question includes a peculiar interrelation between a 
cognition that grasps the concrete fullness of the existent and an 
accompanying change in the concept of "existent" that results from the 
cognition. For Husserl, then, what is to be expressed by the slogan "to the 
things themselves" is as far removed from the program of a "naive realism" as 
it is from that of a speculative determination of the concept of being. 
If striving for the existent itself is to signify something more than a simple 
and dogmatic cognitive turning towards things already available, pres.ent and 
known with respect to their style of being, if in this striving not only is an 
aiming at strict scientific objectivity and valid and adequate methods and 
theories to be in effect but, in addition, - and above all else - a search/or the 
existent is to take place, then such a radically meant slogan must in some way 
provisionally ground the experience that our human intimacy and unending 
intercourse with the existent in everyday experiencing, jUdging, acting and 
suffering as well as in scientific-theoretical thinking is determined through a 
distance, and is so determined without our otherwise knowing it. 
But are we not always enclosed and encircled by the existent, surrounded 
by things, somewhere in space and time, together with fellow men, with 
animals and plants, with night and day? Are we not ourselves a part of nature, 
an existent in the midst of the all-encompassing whole? Do not nearness and 
distance as such first have sense on the ground of the constant and indelible 
being with the existent? It is precisely this "nearness" of the being-with, which 
first makes nearness and distance in the common sense possible, precisely this 
"nearness" of the being-in-the-midst-of that becomes questionable if the 
dictate "to the things themselves" (understood in the radical sense) is raised. 
In "total wonder" the frightening knowledge of the fact that our being with 
the existent is mere supposition isformed. Nearness to being is shown to be an 
"illusion" and becomes distance from being. "To the things themselves" 
means, then, a cognitive movement from a distance from being to an essential 
and original nearness to the existent. 
The sense of the phenomenological slogan first becomes clear when it is 
considered how Husser! attempts to determine the distance from being 
characteristic of human intimacy with the existent. Thus, the idea of an 
original nearness to being, the idea that motivates Husserl's philosophical 
passion, his amor intellectualis, is revealed by the metaphor of distance. 
If ancient philosophy, in its struggle to bring cognizing man near to the 
existent, was a conscious reaction against sophistry and rhetoric, then 
31 
Husserl, though in a completely different and even opposite sense, above all 
else turns against the obstruction to original access to the existent resulting 
from the hegemony of an epistemological dogmatic and the uncritical use of 
language. 
It is necessary to be freed for once from the tutelage and constant, though 
previously unnoticed, guidance by certain habits of thought, convictions, 
learned though never actually examined theories, opinions, pre-judgments 
and "epistemological" predeterminations that decree what "existent," 
"object," "knowing," and so forth are without subjecting them to an original 
consideration. It is necessary to impartially see, merely to see, without being 
concerned about a so-called standpoint; i.e., to secure the possibility of seeing 
with one's eyes as such for the first time. Likewise, it is necessary to for once 
lay aside the inconspicuous stamp that all things and that everything that is at 
all have received from time immemorial from the linguistic sphere. It is 
necessary to eliminate the generally familiar ways of speaking with the 
traditional concepts impressed upon us from the first and to conceptualize 
what is seen with our own eyes. 
The originality of seeing and speaking belong together. However, the 
striving for originality is, for Husserl, essentially a movement away from the 
mediation of the existent and toward the establishment of immediacy. 
Human behavior towards the existent is "mediate" to the extent that it is 
based upon unresolved, opaque traditionality. The reference to traditionality 
can be very superficial and philosophically unproductive if one only considers 
the obvious determinations of ways of life that are based upon tradition. In 
the essential and radical significance this concept has as set forth by Husserl, 
however, traditionality means the essential trait of man's being with the 
existent: intimacy in which the mode of the original experiences of being is 
that of obscurity. 
In the pre-theoretical way oflife, examples of intimacy with things are long-
adopted uses for and utilizations of things; in general, ways of seeing, 
grasping and jUdging things that have been "broken in," have become 
customary. We live in the midst of the existent in the prison of our customs 
and have forgotten how to break out. Scientific-theoretical intimacy, 
scientific-theoretical research and discovery, also has its methodological 
customs which the individual researcher takes over without examination, for 
he cannot examine all of the presuppositions of his science. Positive science, 
as a tradition of determining the existent that is centuries old, always remains 
in the dark shadows of primitive human customs, whether they are clear in 
themselves or not - the custom, for example, of presupposing the being of the 
world. 
Man's distance from being, which H usserl characterized as the obscurity of 
the tradition-instituting experience of being, as the loss of the originality and 
32 
immediacy of the existent through unanalyzed" customs, "is to be eliminated 
by the turn "to the things themselves." However, this means fundamentally 
that it is to be eliminated by philosophical thinking's being turned back. 
3. The Beginning of Philosophy 
The idea of human thinking's being radically turned back is the 
fundamental motive for the phenomenological conception of the idea of 
philosophy. The formulation of the problem of HusserJ's phenomenology is 
not a posing of a problem on the basis of an accepted notion of the essence of 
philosophy, a notion present perhaps as the formation of a tradition. In other 
words, HusserJ does not raise the fundamental question of phenomenology 
within the framework of a determination of the nature of philosophy 
presupposed as valid. He does not pose the question in accordance with a 
guiding idea of so-called "philosophical questions." The setting forth of the 
fundamental problem is nothing other than the se(Festahlishment 0/ the 
phenomenological concept of philosophy. 
Perhaps it is the noteworthy fate of all of man's essential attempts to 
philosophize that the beginning of philosophical cognition must be achieved 
by the projection of the possibility of a new knowledge, by its own posit, its 
own presupposition. Perhaps, moreover, the true idea of a phi/osophia 
perennis, a never-ending inquiry into the eternal essence of the existent and of 
reason, is not so much rejected in its own right as it is by the idea of raising 
philosophy to the rank of a "science" by removing this disturbing putting-
itself-in-question. 
According to the fundamental conviction of phenomenology, the 
beginning of philosophy is not the undertaking of a cognitive procedure, thc 
sense of which is already known; such as, for example, the pre-theoretical 
intimacy with the things or the modes of knowing in either the positivc 
sciences or the traditional methods of doctrines which are well known 
historically. The philosopher in HusserJ's sense is essentially a "beginner" 
because he begins above all else the serf-grounding o/philosophy. 
It has become customary to interpret the foundation of H usserl's 
phenomenological philosophy as a striving for a "philosophy as a strict 
science." Given H usserl's article with this title, this is not without justification. 
However, the inaccuracy of such interpretations is that the sense of science in 
the concept of "strict science" has not been sufficiently removed from the 
concealment which it had for HusserJ himself at first, a concealment that was 
overcome at a relatively late date. They fail to get beneath what philosophy 
and positive science have in common in a negative way, which consists of their 
defense against an irrational "world-view" that serves merely emotive needs, 
and do not get to the positive difference between them. As a result, 
phenomenology is easily labeled as an attempt to vindicate the wisdom of the 
methodological ideal of positive science. 
When an interpretation - as is the case here - is directed only to the sense of 
phenomenological philosophy and abstracts from Husserl's personal process 
of development, the self-grounding of phenomenology by its own projection 
of an original knowledge comes prominently into view. The concept of the 
science of philosophy is first determined on the basis of this "original 
knowledge." Therefore, the sense of this "originality" of knowledge must be 
cha racterized. 
The beginning of philosophy as the institution of philosophical knowledge 
occurs by a conceptual reflection upon that which lies in the problem-forming 
wonder. 
We are inexpressibly astonished over the fact that we always speak about 
the existent, nature, things and all that these involve, that we so to speak 
continually discuss unclarified concepts with an illicit and never 
acknowledged familiarity. We are astonished that we know how to handle the 
existent by manipUlating and using it. We are astonished that we believe to 
know what place, time, motion, mass, extension, number, figure, state, 
justice, substance and property, actuality, being and so forth alt. We are 
astonished that these vague and rough opinions are those which we bring 
with us when we, through "learning," enter into and progress in the 
positive sciences, always encumber,ed by the inexact and uncertain 
preconceptions with which we departed. We are astonished that we, in acting 
and suffering, in working and experiencing, dwell in the midst of the 
existent as an existent without ever seriously attempting to discover what 
this genuinely involves, because we drift along in the twilight of unclarity and 
are so to speak entangled by conventional, unchecked and unproven ways of 
accepting the existent. In H usserl's phenomenology, the inexpressible 
astonishment over man's distance from being and the obscurity of being, 
recognized to be the result of an embedded tradition, is conceptualized by the 
idea of a primal state ofman's access to being. More precisely, it is conceived 
with the setting forth of the possibility of a reproduction of this primal state. It 
must be possible to inquire back and return to the beginning knowledge which 
has been obscured by the embedded tradition, to return to the immediate 
knowledge of the existent from which traditions are derived, though this 
knowledge is continually obscured. The primal beginning of knowledge must be 
able to be rescued from the night of obscurity. Truth, as "non-obscurity," 
must lie within the power of human spirit. In the inquiry back to the beginning 
of knowledge as knowledge of the existent which shows itself immediately, the 
existent must not only unobstructively reveal itelfbut, in addition, must reveal 
itself in its "beginning." That is, it must reveal itself as that which it is above all 
else, viz. existent. True cognition, original knowledge must be possible in the 
passage back to the beginning of knowledge from the beginnings of the 
existent. The phenomenological projection of a scientific philosophy occurs in 
this idea of a theoretical primal state, and the sense of the philosopher's being 
34 
a "beginner" is characterized by the idea. Since only the direction of the 
cognitive aim of phenomenology is to be indicated, the question of the extent 
to which phenomenology actually succeeds in inquiring back to the beginning 
of the existent and knowledge remains out of consideration here. 
The pathos of phenomenology, its enthusiasm, results in the radicalism of 
the "beginner," in the belief that human spirit freed from the burden ofhistory 
has the ability to acquire an immediate relation to the existent. It results in the 
setting forth of a renaissance, a renewal of knowledge that is always possible: 
everything essential can be rediscovered again and again! Philosophizing 
returns man once again to the fundamental position of his existence, to truly 
knowing nearness to the existent. 
The two-sided, though unitarily interwoven examination of the existent is 
to be conducted in the primal state of genuine nearness to and intimacy with 
being. First of all, that claiming to "exist," that which is ungenuine and 
unclarified, that which we at first accept as "obvious" is to be examined. 
Then, however, the concept of "existent" used in the first examination, the 
horizon of sense included in our thinking this primitive concept, must be 
examined. 
The examination of the fundamental concepts "existent" and "knowledge," 
the metaphysical dialogue of human spirit with itself. is not merely a critique 
of man's ordinary, everyday attitude towards the existent It is also a 
peculiar critique of the positive sciences, though not in the sense of an 
unwarranted interference with the process of theoretical research or even a 
presuming to give a priori guidance to the physicist or biologist. Rather, it is a 
critique of the unthematized presuppositions and foundations that precede 
the formulation of the respective positive sciences. Therefore, philosophy is 
the fundamental science in a determinate sense. As a fundamental science, 
however, it is not a science among the sciences nor is it prima scientia inter 
pares. In its essential function, philosophy does not engage in a thorough 
critique of the foundations and presuppositions of the positive sciences in 
order to be the foundation of the positive sciences. Philosophy, as the process 
of making all knowledge, prescientific as well as positive-scientific 
knowledge, knowledge of things as well as knowledge of numbers and logical 
sense-formations, knowledge of the sense of human life, culture, the divine, 
etc. "original," is a living movement of man that so long as the concept of 
theory is oriented by the derivative, so-called "only theoretical" procedure of 
the exact sciences, which is the opposite of "praxis," does not have the 
character of being a "merely intellectual" way of existence. (It is, however, 
extremely questionable whether, for example, pure mathematics and pure 
logic are actually determined by a privation of significances related to living; 
beyond that, whether the emancipation of science from philosophy, that 
modern misfortune commencing with the break between scholasticism and 
natural research, concealed through the anonymous triumph of the latter and 
35 
recapitulated in the so-called "collapse of the Hegelian philosophy," has led to 
that privation.) 
In the phenomenological conception of philosophy as a fundamental 
science that inquires back to the beginning of all knowledge of the existent, 
the aim is to re-root the specific sciences in philosophy, to obviare the 
"emancipation" and to proclaim the supremacy of philosophy. Philosophy is 
to ground the unity of human knowledge not as a subsequent combination in 
the form of a "methodology of the positive sciences" but, rather, as the prior 
probing of the connection between being and knowledge. 
Because philosophy is not a specific science according to this guiding idea 
of phenomenology, the sense of the passage back to originality must be 
sharply contrasted with every interpretation of it in the manner of a specific 
science. The inquiry back to the beginning of knowledge is, thus, not the well 
known psychological question of the psychic origin of our representations, 
despite the fact that Husserl himself was partial to this opinion in his early 
period and perhaps failed to establish the difference determinately enough 
even in his later periods. The decisive factor is not that this psychological 
question is one that concerns a real genesis of human thinking - e.g., from 
childhood to maturity - that is ascertained empirically and not a flow of 
consciousness that is grasped eidetically. No, the essential difference lies 
elsewhere. In formulating his question, the psychologist has his knowledge 
and the existent which is valid in accordance with that knowledge "in 
advance." As a matter of course, he applies this knowledge as a measure for 
judging the '''preliminary stages" that are subsequently considered to be 
stages of a development of knowledge. The psychologist does not thematize 
consciousness in order to bring out what the existent is originally. He naively 
accepts a separation of being and knowing, of world and "world-
representation," of space and "spatial-representation," of time and 
"temporal-representation," etc. That is, he regards the existent to be 
determinate and his knowledge of it to fit the existent. His theme is the intra-
psychic development, the "becoming" of this knowledge, knowledge taken as 
that which fits the existent. 
The phenomenological inquiry back to the beginning of knowledge does 
not search for the origins of psychic development, the immanent genealogy 
of our representations, in knowledge that is present and accepted as valid. 
Rather, it searches for original knowledge of the existent; it searches for 
"original truth." The existent is not predetermined for phenomenology. It 
wants to bring into view knowledge in its struggle with the existent. 
Still required is an explicit delimitation of phenomenology with respect to a 
determinate concept of epistemology. According to its idea, 
phenomenological philosophy is not epistemology if the latter is understood 
to be an investigation - one narrowly defined thematically - of the human 
faculty of cognition that is detached from the problem of being. It is not 
36 
"epistemology" if "faculty of cognition" is, with respect to its possibilities, 
naively pre~upposed to be something self-contained, something complete. It 
is not "epistemology" if what cognition is is considered to be that present in 
both ordinary and positive-scientific cognizing. In other words. 
phenomenological philosophy is not epistemology if thc theory of cognition is 
developed without first ela rifying cognition's essential totality of possi bilitics 
by initiating a cognitive search for the truly existent. 
Thc phenomenological inquiry back to the beginning of knowledge is an 
attempt to grasp the human intellect in its movement t01\'Qrds the existent. To 
be sure, one can also designate such an intention by the expression 
"epistemology." H usserl himself repeatedly designated his theoretical 
intention in this way, often adapting his intention in a misleading way to the 
sense of epistemology excluded here. This hasiust as often led to a misjudging 
of the true sense of his concept of philosophy. 
H usserJ himself regretted the fact that a truly appropriate expression for the 
essence of philosophy was already possessed by a positive science, viz. 
archaeology. 
4. The Presentation of" the Existent Itsell[Die Selbstgebung des Seienden] 
The characterization of the formulation of the fundamental problem of 
phenomenology as the questioning of the whole of the existent by projecting 
the idea of a primal state of human cognition is still essentially formal. 
because it has not yet considercd the particular aspect of the formulation in 
which the unique characteristic of Husserl's phenomenology lies. 
In order to set this unique characteristic in the correct light, to remove 
phenomenology's appearance of heing a positive science of consciousness. an 
appearance that falsifies its sense, and to acccntuatc its fundamental 
philosophical intention. the enveloping sense-horizon of the problem of heing 
and knowledge must be indicated. Because of its origin from this eternal not 
pregiven temporal-historically - problem, the ever-present problematic of the 
fundamental concepts takes root 
in 
the "thematic" explication of 
consciousness. The science of consciousness is incessantly disquieted by the 
question of being and knowledge. 
"Being" and "knowledge" become questionable, become dislodged by the 
awe of wonder. This means that knowledge of the existent can no longer be 
sought and investigated on the hasis of an established acquaintance with the 
existent. that the nature of knowledge of the existent can no longer be looked 
for on the hasis of an established acquaintance. What is sought is genuine 
knowledge of the genuine existcnt. The setting forth of the idea of an original 
access to the existent is not a claim, not an anticipatory decree of such an 
access but, rather, the establishment of a possibility of sensc. If genuine 
knowledge of the existent is possible at ali, then it can be grounded only by the 
genuine existent's being revealed and being originally shown. by an appearing 
37 
of the genuine existent. The idea of the existent's presenting itself is the 
condition for the possibility of knowledge as such. To make the existent as 
phenomenon the original dimension of philosophical reflection does not 
mean to have the existent in advance in some way, but to determine the 
existent in the way that it shows itself. It does not mean to be acquainted with 
knowledge in advance, but to determine knowing in its being with the existent 
which shows itself. The phenomenality of the existent, thus, becomes the 
horizon of all determinations concerning a "being-in-itself" and the possibility 
of knowing related to being-in-itself. This concept of "phenomenality" is far 
from expressing the mere semblance of the existent, far from meaning that 
what merely claims to exist is not genuine. Phenomenality is the true being of 
the existent and phenomenology is the attempt to ground human knowledge 
by going back to the presentation of the existent itself. How the "relation" 
between being and being true [Wahr-sein] must be understood, thus, becomes 
a problem that begins from true being [Wahrsein]. The fundamental question 
of phenomenology, as questions concerning the existent which arise from the 
horizon of true being, is a metaphysical question if the concept of metaphysics is 
oriented by the four-fold, unitary question concerning the existent as existent, 
as one, as true and as good. 
Husserl did not orient the concept of "metaphysics" in this way. For the 
most part he used the word in the common, contemptable sense. 
The unfolding of the problem of being by beginning from true being is not a 
characteristic of philosophizing that belongs exclusively to phenomenology. 
The uniqueness of phenomenology lies in the particular way in which it 
explicates the sense of the original presentation of the existent itself. I n ancient 
philosophy, the sense of "original" access which revealed the existent in its 
genuine being was interpreted as "dianoia." "Reason" is that way of knowingly 
orienting oneself towards the existent in which the existent genuinely shows 
itself, in which the existent appears as what it is itself. 
However, this setting forth of reason as original access to the existent was 
not a "dogmatic," prior decision about the nature of knowledge. Rather, it 
was a problematic projection, a "hypothesis," that was proven only by its 
ability to overcome the problem of being. 
The "hypothesis" of Husserl:s phenomenology is the setting forth of 
intentional~l" understood, originary consciousness as the true access of being. 
The problem of being develops into an intentional analytic; phenomenology 
becomes a science of consciousness. This principle connection out of which 
subjectivity "becomes thematic" must also be understood as the impulse for 
intentional research even at the point--and perhaps at this point most of 
all - where H usserl appears, in an apparently positive-scientific manner, to 
lose his way in an exceedingly ramified analytic, as if he were in a labyrinth. 
Thus, the particular "phenomenological" sense which differentiates Husserl's 
philosophy from other philosophical interpretations of being which begin 
38 
from true being is developed in the intentional-analytic theory of the 
"presentation" of something itself. 
B. THE IDEA OF AN INTENTIONAL ANALYTIC 
5. The Problem of Evidence 
What is sought is the presentation of the existent itself. The situation of this 
search for an original concept of being and knowledge is determined by man's 
living in the midst of what is at first accepted as "existing," what is taken for 
"existent," accepted and taken in the manifold and innumerable modes of 
practical and theoretical behavior. The customary, well-practised experience 
of and the well-learned, "scientific" acquaintance with the existent have lost 
their certainty in the wonder that awakens philosophical questioning. 
However, this unsettled knowledge did not disappear as a result of wonder. 
Rather, as that which is now qucstionable, it provides the point of departure 
for the search for original knowledge. 
If what the existent genuinely is and what mode of knowing is genuine 
knowing of the genuine existent is not uncritically decreed or simply asserted 
dogmatically but, rather, is asked, then such a question runs as follows in 
Husserlian phenomenology: what are the "originary modes of consciousness" 
of the existent, what are the original evidences? Following Brentano's 
terminology, Husserl called consciousness = of "intentionality." Understood 
phenomenologically, then, evidence, as any intentional consciousness of the 
genuine existent, cannot mean merely the grade of certainty of a determinate 
cognition, irrespective of the interpretation of being that grounds it. Evidence 
is not a dignified cognition that is dogmatically established in advance but, 
rather, the problematic concept of the original knowledge which is sought. 
That is, "evidence" here is not the theme of a psychological or epistemological 
characterization, a theme that presupposes that evidence must only bc 
investigated, not sought. Rather, evidence is the title for the central problem 
of Husserl's phenomenology. In its intentional form, which will be determined 
more fully, the problem of evidence encompasses the whole of the 
phenomenological interpretation of being; at first as the inquiry into the 
existent determined by a what-content, then more radically into the existent as 
such. 
In order to determine the formulation of the phenomenological problem of 
evidence, it is necessary to first bring out how H usserl is guided by a projection 
of "originality" which is itself "problematic" in his search for original 
knowledge. In this way, the intentional character of consciousness becomes 
significant in a decisive manner, because the senses of originary and non-
originary consciousness are linked to one another by the projection. Husserl 
acquires the direction for his inquiry into original knowledge by a reflective 
39 
investigation of the intentional sense-moments of non-original knowledge of 
the existent given to begin with. Intentionality is not merely consciousness = 
of an object but is also - which is here of primary importance - consciousness = of 
"sensefully implicit" modes of consciousness. For example, memory is not 
only consciousness of determinate events as past, but is also consciousness of 
past perception. A senseful reference back to perception lies in the intentional 
sense of memory whether we note it or not. According to its intentional 
essence, memory originates from perception. As long as it is meant as a 
memory, even a presumed memory presents itself as a determinate sense-
modification of perception. Memory is a derivative of perception and bears 
within itself, as a derivate mode of consciousness, the pointing back to the 
primal mode. Being known is an intentional modification of the actual 
learning. Dreams, as dreamed wakefulness, refer back sensefully to 
wakefulness; being imagined, as the imagining of something actual, to 
actuality; mediacy as such, to the immediate; "symbolic" thinking (e.g., 
"calculating" as an abbreviation for explicit, mathematical thinking) to 
explicit thinking, and so forth. However, the intentional references back are 
not always so obvious. Rather, they are for the most part latent, obscured as it 
were, so that an effort is required in order to uncover the referential structure 
of the various modes of consciousness. 
The fundamental insight of an intentional explication of consciousness is 
that all conscious life is not only unified in the unity of a total flow of psychic 
processes, but that it also bears within itself a unity of sense that must guide 
every theoretical apprehension of consciousness. An explication that seeks 
understanding does not seek merely to ascertain the changing succession of 
intentions, memories, acts of thought, comings to mind and dispositions, the 
succession of dull and clear. articulate and vague experiencings. judgings, 
meanings, presentings and phantasizings, the succession of desirings, 
wishings, etc. in their de facto succession, without subsequently seeking to 
bring out the rational order which governs this apparent chaos of flowing 
psychic life. This order is nothing other than the totality of references of sense 
which extend from the primal-modal consciousnesses to their intentional 
modifications, first of all in the obvious form of non-originary consciousness' 
being related back to originary consciousness. The following questions are not 
considered initially: the more fundamental problem of how the sense of the 
originary modes of consciousness themselves are founded, the cancellation of 
the equal status of the types of originary consciousness and the relativization 
of the concept of originarity. In an intentional explication of consciousness, 
however, it is important to bear in mind that in contrast to the faculty of 
cognition being compartmentalized according to fundamental faculties ofthe 
psyche which are not reducible to one another, the sense-unity of every 
cognizing is seen in its founding of sense, a founding that governs the 
cognizing in its totality. 
40 
If the thesis that H usserl 's phenomenology becomes an intentional analytic 
in the process of considering the problem of being in that it searches for 
original knowledge of the existent is justified, then it is evident that the 
problem of being posed by phenomenology already shows an intentional 
structure. Determinate, intentional concepts are already employed in the 
projection of the problem. That the problem of being and knowledge is posed 
by means of an intentional, fundamental insight into the essence of cognition 
is indicated by the apprehension of the "mediacy," "traditionality" and 
"habituality" of our behavior towards the existent; i.e., by the apprehension 
of those concepts which express distance from being as "intentional 
modifications of primal modes of consciousness." In sum, intentionality 
becomes expressly thematic, becomes the domain of an "intentional analytic," 
in the process of considering the problem of being posed intentionally. 
Husserl seeks originary knowledge by a reflection on the implications of 
sense of non-originary knowing, knowing in which we are turned towards the 
existent as something long known and familiar. However, this does not mean 
simply the easily effected passage back from, for example, memory to 
perception - i.e., to a perception that is already set within the total acceptance 
of a traditional knowledge, knowledge that is rooted in multifarious co-
acceptances. The continuous chain of "perceptual acts," acts almost 
constantly given in the flow of conscious processes, is not that to which the 
implicit sense of memory genuinely refers back. If we inquire into their 
intentional sense, such de jacto, concretely occurring perceptions are always 
more than pure perceptions. They are acts in which the existent is present, but 
in such a way that the existent is completely permeated and saturated by what 
has been inherited from previous perception and by knowledge that has been 
acquired individually or through education. What is perceived in such a 
perception has innumerable, already known characteristics and superimposed 
layers of sense, both of which cover the core of that which is actually perceived 
originarily. We do not first begin to perceive, but have always already 
perceived. Actual perceiving is not originary consciousness, because 
sedimented acquisitions of knowledge which are traditional and taken over 
are involved in the perceiving. In the de jacto succession of psychic processes, 
the pure, primal modes of knowing do not occur intact and detached from the 
complexes of interlaced primal and modified modes of consciousness. 
Accordingly, the primal modes of knowing cannot be ascertained simply by 
psychological reflection. A particular method of seeing which carefully and 
subtly establishes intentional distinctions is necessary in order to distinguish 
purely, under the guidance of intentional references back, the primal modes of 
knowing from the de jacto forms of consciousness. Intentional analysis does 
not merely ascertain the occurring givennesses of consciousness. Rather it 
primarily anticipates consciousness' inner order o.f sense. This anticipation is 
the constructive moment of the intentional analysis of phenomenology. It first 
41 
makes possible a specific-scientific thematization of consciousness in the sense 
of a "phenomenological psychology" as well as the intentional analytic 
motivated by the philosophical problem of the relation of being and knowing. 
The problem of evidence, the inquiry searching for the presentation of the 
existent itself, becomes for Husser! an inquiry into the originary modes of 
consciousness. By departing from non-originary knowledge, the peculiarity of 
its non-originality, its "reference back," is conceptualized by penetrating into 
the implicit sense of non-originary knowledge. As a result, the search for 
originary knowledge has acquired a df:terminate, guiding idea. Obviously, 
"originary" knowledge is knowledge that no longer refers back in itself 
and no longer receives sense from pointings back that are modifications = of 
originary knowledge. Rather, originary knowledge is precisely the referent of 
every pointing back and is that which bestows sense upon each modification 
altered in the process of modification. 
Originary consciousness - this is in fact Husserl's idea - is sense-bestowing 
[sinngebendes] consciousness, that beginning consciousness which bestows 
sense upon a whole chain of modifications, obscurations and mediacies such 
that it is its sense that is "modified," "obscured" and "mediated." Originary 
and non-originary modes of consciousness do not stand next to one another, 
separate and unrelated, but form a unity of sense, a nexus of sense, an 
interrelated system. For example, "pure" perception is implicit in memory, 
expectation, phantasy, mere thinking, etc., analogous to the way the possible 
"actuality" is implicit in a possibility. 
By means of the guiding clue of intentional "pointing back" and under the 
guiding idea of a sense-bestowing consciousness, Husser! arrives at the 
"hypothesis" of phenomenology in the determination of originarity as 
intuition. For him, seeing is original evidence. It is the mode of consciousness 
in which the existent shows itselfin its "flesh and blood" existence, the mode in 
which the existent presents itself. The existent shows itself in seeing as both 
what it is and how it is. But is not such a beginning arbitrary? Is not the 
proclamation of seeing merely an authoritative decree of reason? Is there, 
then, a criterion for "seeing's" actually being the genuine, unobstructed access 
to the existent itself? It is significant for the intentional-analytic style of 
Husserl's thinking that the problem of evidence is set apart frbm all 
controversial questions concerning "criteria" and is transformed into a 
problem of research. Instead of speculating argumentively about the 
justification for seeing and setting forth empty, contrary possibilities 
constructed by thought, seeing is to be exercised, original evidence is to be 
produced. It is precisely in this way that seeing is to be determined to be the 
ultimate "criterion" for all mere possibilities constructed by thought. Seeing is 
legitimized only by its accomplishment: the showing of the existent itself. One 
cannot go back behind seeing, because seeing is the ultimate, primal mode of 
human cognition's being with the existent, the mode that bestows sense-upon 
42 
all other modified modes of consciousness. Seeing can be inexact or 
incomplete. However, it can be rectified only by seeing, by more exact. more 
complete seeing. Seeing can "deceive," can be mis-taken. However, the 
possibility of deception does not confute the authority of seeing, for even 
deceptions can be shown to be deceptions only by better seeing. 
Husser! most emphatically states his fundamental understanding of 
intuition a~ the original access of knowing to the existent in the following 
proposition. "No theory we can imagine can mislead us with regard to the 
principle of all principles: that every intuition that presents something 
originarily is a source of legitimacy for knowledge, that everything presented 
to us originarily (in its 'flesh and blood' actuality as it were) in intuition is to be 
taken simply as that which presents itself."3 Is this intuitionism? No, if by 
intuitionism is understood a contention that sensory intuition is the only true 
cognitive access to the existent, a contention that is based upon the traditional 
division of the psyche. 
For Husserl, intuition is not merely sensory intuition, sensory seeing. 
Rather, it is any type of consciousness in which its corresponding object is 
given in the mode of "itself-there," such as the way sensuously given things are 
given in sensory intuition. More precisely, intuition is for Husser! the title for 
that common to all types of the presentation of something itse(f It is, 
therefore, a concept by analogy in which the guiding sense is the intuition of 
sensory experience. There is, however, an intuition or, better, intuitiveness 
pertaining to arithmetic and geometric thinking, logical thinking, judicative 
thinking, the experience of another psyche ("empathy"), etc. Numbers and 
number relations "present themselves" in a different way than things. Pure 
corporality "presents itself" differently than animated corporality of plants 
and animals, and so forth. The fundamental types of existent prescribe the 
fundamental types of experiences in which they present themselves. The prior, 
prejudiced determination of what should be accepted as "the presentation of 
something itself," e.g., by a dogmatic thesis of "sensationalism, ""naturalism" 
or "empiricism," cuts one off from the possibility of originarily grasping the 
existent of a type other than that which presents itself in the mode of access 
absolutized by the thesis. 
Is it not "circular" when Husserl's phenomenology, with the principal 
purpose of being open to everything existent, to the existent of every 
type, extends the concept of "intuition" to every type of primal-model 
consciousness? Is not originarity first explicated by intuition, then intuition 
by originarity? 
The initial determination of the originarity which is sought as "intuition" in 
the narrow sense provides direction for the analytic explication of the 
intentional composition of this, a type of presentation of something itself. 
Thus, an understanding is effected which brings to light the whole context of 
this evidence along with the series of modifications which pertain to it 
43 
sensefully, the whole, latent referential structure. Certainly one cannot go 
back behind seeing. However, one can penetrate seeing analytically and 
explicate it according to the whole, concealed wealth of implicit intentional 
structures. In such an intentional analysis, the merely initial stage is to first 
verify seeing to be a presentation of something itself. Sense, limit, structure. 
relations of references of originary, sensible cognition, the system of 
coordination between object-structure and the structure of cognition, all 
come to light in the analysis. In a way analogous to this kind of analytic 
clarification, each claim that a type of cognition is "originary" must be 
examined. The extension of the concept of intuition is not an uncritical 
generalization. The sense-bestowing originarity of any professed evidence 
must be developed analytically. Therefore, one cannot claim, by appealing to 
the phenomenological thesis. that each type of existent has its original type of 
experience pertaining to it - perhaps some kind of uncontrollable, 'mystical" 
presentations of the existent - without conducting the analytic proof for this 
claim. Living in the certainty of a true or meant evidence is something 
completely different than justifying a mode of cognition as evidence. 
Justification here does not mean simply a demonstrating, a simple showing 
(even though this is also essential). It is also a presenting of the presentation-
of-something-itself itself, an intentional-analytic evidence of evidence. 
"Originary consciousness" is here the sought, the problematic. Likewise, the 
existent is sought as well. In sum, the totality of the originary modes of 
consciousness is sought, since within this totality is to be shown what the 
existent is. 
In Husser!'s phenomenology, the problem of evidence (understood as a 
philosophical problem) becomes an intentional investigation of correlates. 
This is not an investigation of a correlation given unproblematically but, 
rather, is primarily an inquiry into a correlation that must be investigated. 
Because the presentation of the existent itself or "evidence" is removed from 
naive certainty and becomes the aim of man's theoretical seeking, a seeking in 
which man wants to renew the presentation from the ground up in all of his 
existential relations to the world, things, the ideal and God, an inquiry into the 
primordial meeting of knowledge and being commences. It is an inquiry into 
the light of an original encounter and agreement which, as the idea of truth, is 
the fundamental presupposition of sense for the possibility of knowledge as 
such. This encounter is attested to by knowledge that is meant, for its 
authority is derived from a meant connection with the "things themselves." 
The phenomenological concept of the "presentation of something itself" 
contains the idea of a primal relation, a primal correlation - namely, the true 
synousiad of existent and knowledge which makes truth possible. Husser! 
used the term "experience." similar to the way he used the concept of 
"intuition," in order to express the originality of knowingly being-with-the-
existent-itself. Here again, a narrow sense of the world - meaning a type of 
44 
cognizing - and a broader sense of the world - meaning a characteristic way ol 
carr.ving out cognition that concerns all types of cognition - are to be 
distinguished. 
As Husser! says, phenomenology is "radical empiricism" in so far as it is 
motivated by thc vehement desire to set aside for a time all meanings. 
validities, traditions, convictions. acquaintances and customs and to acquire a 
relation to everything existent in which the existent is experienced originally. 
The structure of the "experiences" which arc sought, experiences that present 
the existent itself, therefore, is fundamentally determined intentionally. That 
is, the correlation which is in question has an intentional sense. It is of 
preeminent significance for an integral understanding of thc metaphysical 
problem which drives and moves Husserl's philosophy to recognize that the 
intentional structure of the phenomenological problem of evidence cannot be 
derived from the formal essence of intentionality. The existent is not found in 
an intentional analytic because every consciousness. including originarily-
experiencing consciousness, is a consciousness = of an object and because a 
meant as such always lies in its being. A psychological (specific-scientific) 
investigation of intentionality finds meant existents in consciousness, 
existents given in various modes of consciousness (itself present, mediately 
present, present mediately by reiteration, etc.). Therefore. it is not the job of 
the psychologist to examine the concept of being valid for both him and the 
analyzed consciousness, the concept of being which determines the sense of 
"itself present," "mediately present," etc. He is onto logically disinterested. He 
investigates the given consciousness and the properties of consciousness 
connected with its intentionally meant existent. He remains within the 
thematic domain of the psychic when he analyzes the inner-psychic 
correlation between modes of consciousness and "objective" sense. The 
misunderstanding of the principal distinction between philosophy and specific 
science in the concept of phenomenology leads, then. to the almost inveterate 
error in the repeatedly formulated objection that Husserl's phenomenology is 
uninterested in the "question of reality," in the problem of being. It is objected 
that phenomenology thematized the existent merely as a SUbjective formation 
of meaning, as a moment of sense in the intentional life of consciousness. 
The philosophical search for the existent phenomenologically, the search 
for originary evidences - is the attempt to grasp consciousness in its meeting 
with the existent, in its experiencing ability, in its accomplishment of 
legitimizing being, in its executive function. 
]n order to understand the formulation of the phenomenological problem 
in its desire to attain a radical presuppositionJessness, it is necessary to 
disregard all preconceived theories concerning "immanence" and 
"transcendence" and the SUbjective and objective moments of the cognitive 
relation. By this, naturally, the knowledge gained from such cpistemological 
distinctions is not doubted or even challenged. Rather, "no use is made of it" 
45 
as long as everything is still open in the struggle for an original "experience" of 
the existent. Therefore, the meeting of the existent and consciousness cannot 
be forced into the schema, one which is familiar to us, of a correlation between 
"object" and "subject," of "object" and "act." This schema is tacitly 
determined by the model of the so-called "transcendent perception of a 
thing," as if the existent stood on one side, consciousness on the other. Is it the 
case, then, that the existent is only that experienced, perceived, remembered, 
judged, meant, desired, etc. within the fundamental attitude of consciousness, 
an attitude that is discovered first and that accords with consciousness' way of 
life directed to nature, to the "external world",? Is it not the case that 
consciousness, the experiencing and the perceiving also "are',,? Is knowing not 
a "relation to being'''? If consciousness itself "exists" in the midst of the whole 
of the existent as an existent and is encompassed by the existent, then 
consciousness can certainly never simply have the encompassing-enveloping 
whole "over against it" and remain outside of the whole itself. On the other 
hand, consciousness, as consciousness:= of, as intentionality, is knowing that 
objectifies [verggegenstiindlichendes WissenJ The formulation of the 
fundamental problem of phenomenology is also characterized by that which 
it leaves undecided and unstated, viz. how the objectification of the existent in 
accordance with knowing must be understood as an intra-ontic occurrence. 
In its provisional form as the inquiry into the originary evidence of the 
existent, Husserl's inquiry into the presentation of something itself is 
accompanied by a concept of "object" that can lead to a radical 
misunderstanding. Namely, the interpretation of the concept of "existent" 
just rejected seems to be present in the concept of "object. "Husserl calls for an 
extension of the concept of existent that corresponds with the extension of the 
concept of "object," "object" being understood as the correlate of an act that 
intends something, an act whose correlate has been identified sensefully. This 
extension is directed against a naive, pre-philosophical narrowness in which, 
thanks to his "naturalistic" prejudice, man for the most part holds that only 
what he can grasp with his hands exists; the sensuously real, the visible, 
audible things. As a result, numbers and ideal sense formations (e.g., logic) 
cannot be grasped in their self-sufficient being as existents of a unique type 
and become objects of psycho logistic misinterpretations. The extension is 
properly only the expression of a methodological precaution: any existent, 
however it is composed, is to be accepted initially as it shows itself without any 
prejUdice. That is, it is to be grasped in its objective content. What can be 
legitimated in originary acts as something self-same and identical, with its own 
style, its own unique properties and determinations in a way particular to it, is, 
in spite of all prejudices, something self-sufficient and independent. In this 
sense, it is an "existent." 
The sense of this extended concept of existent which opposes naturalistic 
narrowness establishes it as a provisional, auxiliary concept that governs the 
46 
formulation of the phenomenological problem of evidence. However. this 
sense is still prior to the genuine. philosophical discussion of the ontological 
concepts in Husserl's phenomenology. 
With this reservation. the synousia of the existent and knowledge is 
determinable as the sought intentional system of correlation between the 
originary modes of consciousness. understood in their executive function of 
legitimation ("accomplishment" [Leistung]), and the fundamental types of 
objects. However. since a running back through the referential relations of 
non-evident knowing. an awakening of that which is "implicated" latently. is 
set in action in the search for originary evidences. and since a consciousness 
accepted at first as "primal-modal" must be verified. a verification in which 
the consciousness must be shown to be the "sense-bestowing consciousness" in 
all of its sense-modifications - to take a simple case, perception bestows sense 
upon the whole reiteration of intentionalities in the case of a memory of a 
memory: M' (M (P) ) - the whole consciousness, with its concealed, inner 
rational order of "primal modes" in their intentional modifications, becomes 
thematic in the process of considering the problem of evidence. The final 
objects which are discoverable in evidences, then, become indices for an 
intentional analytic of all of the ways of being related both knowingly and 
meaningfully (intuitively and non~intuitively) to the existent. The existent is 
set within the concrete system of conscious life and, hence, an atmosphere of 
life is acquired by the existent's being-for-man. Phenomenologically. evident 
knowing is not simply opposed to non-evident knowing. This opposition is 
not "fixed" by a rejection of non-originary knowing. Rather. non-originary 
knowing, in its modified relation to the existent, is to be clarified on the basis 
of originary knowing. As a result, the intentional-analytic problem of 
evidence also encompasses the "evidence of the non-evident." 
In the indicated, provisional form of the intentional analytic, the 
presentation of the existent itself is sought in so far as the existent is already 
the existent with a determinate whatness. What is sought are evidences. the 
fundamental types of originary consciousness. The "extension" made by 
equating the existent with the self-sufficient object is precisely an indication of 
the fact that the question does not yet concern the evidence of the existent qua 
existent but, rather, the presentation of the existent itself which is articulated 
into regions. 
The direction of the inquiry into the originary evidences. an inquiry 
conducted phenomenologically by analytically demonstrating a cognitions 
primal-modal characteristic and not by referring to its subjective certainty, is 
guided by a preliminary method in which the domains of objects, the regions 
of the existent articulated by genus and species according to the what-content 
of the existent, are the givens for the analytic examination of evidence. In 
other words, the problem of the presentation of the existent itself, the entities 
which stand under eidetic universalities, is guided by a prior, methodical 
47 
grasping of the eidetic universalities themselves. H usserl called this grasping of 
essences ideation. Ideation is in fact what is meant by the traditional title "a 
priori" knowledge, the cognitive accomplishment of the so-called eidetic 
sciences. However, it is Husserl's understanding that the methods of eidetic 
cognition in the de facto, present eidetic sciences are, for a change, 
underdetermined and, further, that there has yet to come about a complete 
formation of all of the possible eidetic sciences, sciences which would be 
joined together in the unity of a system. In tackling the problem of the 
methodically clear establishment of the systematic totality of all eidetic 
knowledge, Husserl's phenomenology sees a program of work, the carrying 
out of which is of the greatest importance for the fundamental question 
concerning the presentation of the existent itself - or, more exactly, for the 
exposition of this fundamental question. The considerable stress H usserl gives 
the required theory of essences (eidetics) has frequently misled readers to the 
opinion that phenomenology is actually nothing other than eidetic science. In 
contrast to this, it is necessary above all to recognize the preliminary role of 
eidetics, a role that serves the exposition of the problem. Eidetic science is not 
philosophy but positive science (for example, logic, mathematics). By means 
of a methodical investigation into its true eidetic universality, the vague, 
general acquaintance with its field of objects, which any empirical science 
already has in its formulation, enables the a priori, the a priori structure,to be 
clearly established and clearly defined. As a result, the science becomes 
conscious of the a priori structure within which empirical research can be 
carried on. The enormous importance of a preceding, a priori determination 
for an empiricism corresponding to and guided by it is shown by the example 
of modern natural science. 
The de facto, formed eidetic disciplines of mathematics and logic, the two 
splendid, rational instruments of natural science, do not encompass the full a 
priori of nature, an a priori that must be developed systematically. A series of 
eidetic sciences has not yet been outlined as such. The existent is explained in 
accordance with the articulation into universal regions of whatness which is 
present in the existent. Therefore, a fundamental distinction stands out for 
Husserl in the determinations attributed to the existent in accordance with 
essence. This distinction is expressed by the distinction between "material" 
and "formal" eidetic sciences. Concisely stated, Husserl calls a determination 
of an existent that predicates a what ness in the sense of a genus and species 
"material" (for example, being a living being - being an animal). (The 
concepts of genus and species may not, however, be taken in the loose sense of 
mere concepts of type.) Eidetic concepts that abstract from all aspects 
referring to a determinate what-content and determine the existent in its 
empty structural form are "formal" (for example, as being something, as being 
a multitude, etc.). H usserl also designates the distinction between the material 
and formal a priori to be the distinction between "synthetic" and "analytic" a 
48 
priori (whereby this concept of "analytic" must be strictly differentiated from 
that of intentional-analytic). Again, Husser! also speaks of the distinction 
between "material" and "formal ontologies." 
Since Husserl calls the theory of the eidetic universalities of the existent 
"ontology" and, with respect to the multiplicity of regions. cven speaks of 
"ontologies" in the plural. he entitles a group of positive sciences with a term 
which otherwise designates the philosophical problem of being. This has its 
unfortunate consequences. Either the restricted. particular sense that the term 
"ontology" has for H usserl is generally not recognized and. hence. 
phenomenology is interpreted without regard for what here has been termed 
"ontology" - therefore, phenomenology is misunderstood to be a universal 
theory of essence - or one sees the limited, prephilosophical sense of H usserl's 
term but then fails to see the ontological problem in phenomenology as such-
i.e .. the problem inquiring into the concept of the genuine existent. It is 
difficult to see something if the name is lacking. 
However. the theory of essence can also be a title for a theory that emerged 
from the philosophical determination of the existent. For H usserL eidetics is 
not that atfirst. The concept of essence docs not first have a scnsc developed 
ontologically (i.e., in accordance with the concept of being). Rather. it is 
determined by the provisional concept of the existent, by the object in the 
broadest sense, and determined this way by design. "Ontology" (= eidetics) is 
outlined as the a priori theory of objects. 
The construction of the science of the material and formal essences of 
objects is effected by the method of ideation for Husser!' Ideation is an act of 
consciousness that presents something itself. In this act. the "ideal object." the 
essence, originarily shows itself and as a result institutes an insight into the 
universal style of being of the individual entities standing under this eidetic 
universality. The eidetics outlined as the theory of objects is, as the theoretical 
procedure of ideation, fully naive as long as it only has the preliminary 
function of making the eidetic regions available for the intentional-analytic 
problem of the presentation of the entities themselves which stand under the 
eidetic universalities. as long as it provides the" ontological fiuidinfi clues," as 
Husser! expressed it. for intentional analysis. This eidetics claims to be the 
originary presentation of the eidos itself, but it is not the intentional-analytic 
justification of this claim. This means that even logico-mathematical evidence 
(as an example of the evidence ofideative knowledge) - traditionally praised 
as the paradigm of evidence as such 
requires a clarification. 
Husser! terms ideation. as a method that is used and a method that naively 
establishes eidetic knowledge, an intuitive knowledge. In order to emphasize 
its being a mode of intuition, H usserl also called ideation "the seeing of an 
essence" [Wesensschau]. Once again, however, "intuition" and "seeing" must 
not be equated with sensory seeing, seeing with the bodily eyes. Essences arc 
not visible things. Nevertheless, ideation is a seeing and. indeed, one so 
49 
forceful that the seen essence as it were springs up before one's eyes. The 
methodical structure of ideation can be characterized by the two stages of the 
phenomenological grasping of essences. An ingenious eidetic insight that 
comes like lightning is always possible. However, it can never become a 
method. Even though it is precisely this ingenious insight which is 
occasionally meant by the word "intuition," it is not valid for the 
phenomenological concept of the seeing of an essence. This is a thoroughly 
jejune and circumstantial procedure. In the attempt to establish the essential 
structure of a domain of objects, a domain pregiven in its vague typicality -
e.g., the essential uniqueness of the corporal, material thing of nature - thefirst 
stage in Husserl's method is to vary an exemplarily chosen thing in its 
given composition such that all the possibilities lying within its unawakened 
horizon of sense, the possibilities of the can-also-be-otherwise, are tried out as 
it were, are expressly run through. Again, this is not merely a vague 
"phantasying" the thing to be otherwise. Such a procedure would not enable 
one to clearly see the incompatibility of determinations imagined to be 
together. Rather, it is an intuitive, clear and elaborate presenting of the 
possibilities of being otherwise that do not destroy the identity of the thing. 
The possibilities which lie within the undeveloped sense of a thing cannot be 
ascertained by a quick glance of casual assessment. Rather, they are 
ascertained only by running through the range of intuitively presentable 
possibilities. We have motivated possibilities, which guide the variation 
initially, by means of our memory of determinations of a thing which were 
experienced in the past and do not occur in the present example and by 
indications of possible alterations given in the example. However, it is in 
phantasy that we first free ourselves from the bond of defacto reality and rush 
through the range of all possibilities, possibilities both motivated and 
unmotivated. The exemplary thing can then be freely modified with respect to 
all directions and all determinations. Series of individual possibilities are 
formed, even whole systems of ordered series. The genuine seeing of an 
essence, the establishment of the essence by objectifying it, takes place on the 
ground of this variation which explores the range of possiblity, on the ground 
of this empiricism of phantasy. This second stage of ideation is as it were the 
bringing of the range of possibility within which the variation took place into 
view. It is the thematization of the invariance that bears all of the variants. 
The being-self-same which makes all being-other possible stands out from the 
innumerable, different, intuitively presented possibilities of being-other. 
Possibility, the essence which makes the variants possible, stands out from the 
multifarious variants which are possible. Moreover, what stands out is the 
essence as object and, in accordance with that discussed previously, as 
"existent. " 
An essence is the essence of the entities standing under it. For Husser!, the 
relation of an essence to the entities standing under it is initially - i.e., on the 
50 
provisional level of the problem - in no way determined by that relation which 
dominated the traditional metaphysics of essence; viz .. the relation between a 
ground of being which externalizes itself and "appearance." For H usserl. 
essence is taken to be the invariance of the sense of the object in contrast to the 
possibilities of the object's being this or that which lie within its sense. From 
the beginning, this invariance has a sense that is related to cognition. 
Invariance is what is maintained in all, however varied, presentations. 
Therefore, a connection bctween being and consciousness is set forth even by 
the method of ideation. This connection becomes very important in the later. 
intentional-analytic clarification of eidetic evidence. 
The important auxiliary position of the "theory of object" eidetics for the 
exposition of the phenomenologically central problem of evidence lies in the 
fact that it predelineates the general directives of the regions of the existent 
determined with respect to its ontological whatness for the search for original 
knowledge of the genuine existent. Thus, it prepares the ground for the 
question concerning the connection between the fundamental types of objects 
and the fundamental types of originary evidence. However. fruitful methods 
lead all too easily to uncritical extensions. It is an open question whether the 
method of ideation just outlined could be carried out in all of the eidetic 
domains of the existent; for example, whether the essence of man could bc 
apprehended by the phantasy-modification of possibilities. It is also a naivete, 
represented by the "early" Husserl, though later revised, to extend the eidctic 
method formed with regard to the existent as object to "consciousness" and its 
connection with its objects and, thus. to seek to develop the problem of 
evidence by an investigation of correlates that proceeds eidetically. The 
inquiry into the presentation of the existent itself. in so far as it has a method, 
can acquire significant "guiding clues" from the "theory of objects" ideation. 
However, the philosophical problem cannot itself be governed in its method 
by a naive "presentation of the essence itself." The method of ideation itself 
forms a problem of evidence in which the originarily giving consciousncss is 
first to be analytically disclosed and then what the essence "is" is to be 
determined. 
6. Intentional Ana(vsis 
The specific characteristic of the idea of an intentional analytic which 
emerges from the phenomenological fundamental question concerning the 
presentation of the existent itself should now be more closely defined by a 
discussion of the concept of "intentional analysis." Is intentional analysis a 
thorough analysis of something previously given, something therefore which is 
at hand, or is it the access to intentionality? The phenomenological answer to 
the alternatives can be formulated by this thesis: "intentionality" as such is 
first brought to light by intentional analysis. By this, Husserl's concept of 
intentionality is clearly distinguished from the "sensationalism of 
51 
intentionality," the theory which holds that intentionalities can be ascertained 
as data, as givennesses found on the tablet of consciousness, just as 
sensationalism ascertains sense data. Intentionality in the phenomenological 
sense is not merely a property of the psychic that we become aware of 
reflectively. We are well acquainted with consciousness = of as, for example, 
looking at something, jUdging something, acknowledging and rejecting 
something, loving and hating something, and the like. We do not need to 
discover intentionality in this sense. Just as we have things, ideal sense-
formations (e.g., numbers) and unitary objects on the side of objects, we find 
unitary acts on the subjective side. Reflection shows us multifarious SUbjective 
processes, all of which bear in themselves the peculiarity of 
consciousness = of. Therefore, they bear the "property" of intentionality in 
themselves. Thus, a classification of acts grasped reflectively according to 
their respective intentional sense remains based upon "intentionality" being 
something "pre given. " 
It is Husserl's decisive, fundamental insight into the essence of 
intentionality that the apparently simple consciousness = of is the result of a 
simplification [Vereinfachleistung], such that consciousness = of is a 
confluence of many multiplicities of consciousness into a compact 
consciousness = of that conceals the moments of sense which are active and 
operative in it. The task of intentional analysis is to uncover the modes of 
consciousness, modes that are laden with sense [sinnerfullten], which operate 
in concealment and are veiled by their result. Its theme is functioning 
intentionality, the actively sense-forming, sense-producing and sense-
transforming function of consciousness which in concealing itself, forms the 
simple, psychic act-unities. Both the pregiven and ever available 
intentionality and functioning intentionality have the same formal 
characteristic; each is precisely consciousness = of. The problem 'of 
intentionality is to inquire back to the syntheses of the intentional 
accomplishments [Leistungen] which contribute sense, syntheses by which a 
"simple" act of consciousness is formed, by departing from the gross act-
unities of SUbjective life. Therefore, the passage back to an originarily 
legitimizing consciousness required by the fundamental problem of the 
presentation of the existent itself obviously cannot stop with a simple, primal-
modal act, however much this act, as opposed to its intentional modifications, 
is demonstrated to be the sensebestowing consciousness. Rather, it is 
necessary to then make the originary consciousness = of expressly and 
analytically thematic and, thus, tc understand it in its function, in its active 
formation of sense. The simplified act-form of evidence must be taken back to 
the beginning of the process of simplification and be demonstrated to be the 
result of this process of functioning intentionality. With this, however, the 
idea of an intentional analytic is determined to be an inquiry of enormous 
proportions. Not only are all the modes of human knowing of the existent to 
52 
be traced back to the grounding, originary modes that bestow sense and to be 
understood from that point; in addition, these primal modes of consciousness 
which present something itself are themselves to be explicated and 
differentiated, a procedure that exhibits the whole dimension of the 
intentional sense locked up in them. 
The question of how functioning intentionality, which otherwise remains 
latent. is to be brought to light by intentional analysis, of how to go back to the 
functioning intentionality behind the simple act-form, appears to be answered 
by the possi bility of reflection. By reflection we usually understand the explicit 
mode of our self-consciousness, the explicit mode of our knowledge of the 
knowing of objects, which consists in a cognitive turning toward the subjective 
life. We turn as it were from the perceived to the perceiving, from thejudgment 
to the judging, from the objects to the subjective. Such reflective turnings, 
however, are always well known and familiar to us. We are acquainted with 
the correlation between object and consciousness = of the object. and with 
the fact that the unity of the act corresponds to the unity of the object. 
However, reflection on the act, noetic reflection, is determined with respect to 
its possible range and depth by the sense of the object from which the 
reflection turns to that which corresponds to it subjectively. This insight is an 
essential moment of the phenomenological method of intentional analysis. 
Since reflection always merely turns away from the compact unit,!' of the 
object, from the thing to consciousness of the thing, from number to counting, 
reflection concerns just such a compact. subjective unity of life, the act, and 
does not get behind it. The fundamental uniqueness of intentional analysis 
rests in the method of noematic reflection: i.e .. in reflection on the object in the 
hoH' of its heing meant. The objective sense, the noem(/, the sense of the 
existent - that from which the turning back to the subjective consciousness = 
of begins - is investigated according to its inexpressly given horizon of 
sense, the horizons of sense implicitly given along with the object, prior to 
genuine-noetic reflection. As a result, the latter acquires a guiding clue for 
breaking up the compact act-unity and inquiring methodically into the 
implicit, sense-forming intentionalities within it. Husserl's elementary 
example is the phenomenological analysis of the perception of a corporal 
thing. If we turn back immediately from the seen tree to the SUbjective process 
of seeing, without first developing the seen tree expressly according to its 
moments of sense, the analysis rapidly comes to an end. Against this, Husserl 
begins with reflection on the tree in the how of its modes of appearance. The 
seen tree, for example. is seen from one side. However, the whole tree is 
implied by this side; i.e., the sides that are not yet seen but which have possible 
modes of being seen. I could walk around the tree, but would again have 
only one side with the implication of the others. The tree appears to me in a 
precisely investigatable system of the givenness of sides, a system of the modes 
of appearance which are inseparable from the tree. One normally does not 
53 
pay attention to this structure of appearance, especially when a simple, 
thematic interest is involved. 
In such a case, the modes of appearance are lived through [durchlebt], not 
observed [erlebt]. The thematic interest is focused, as if by a lens, upon the 
one, unitary object. Noematic reflection shatters this thematic simplicity of 
consciousness and objectifies the whole system of the lived-through modes of 
appearance by which the simple object is given. All of the noematical~v 
established moments of the given ness of sides, the givenness of nearness and 
distance, the outer and inner horizons and so forth, become indices for noetic-
reflective inquiries. Further, noematic reflection is directed towards the 
object in the how of its modes of givenness, towards its self-sameness in the 
differing modes of perception, memory, phantasy., etc. It is directed towards 
the implicit horizon of previous, "sedimented" experiences which lie in the 
sense of the object and provide indications for subjective accomplishments 
which institute sense. Continuing along these lines, there results an ever 
increasing quantity of differentiations that constitute the essential aspect of 
intentional analysis. The style of phenomenological work is expressed 
precisely by Husserl's demand for an analytic that is carried through. The 
problem of evidence is transformed into the nearly infinite task of explicating 
the universe of consciousness in all of its still unforeseeable, hidden 
implications and tracing consciousness' ability to legitimate the existent to its 
utmost depths. 
We cannot portray here what the intentional analysis which is carried out is 
like, which abundance of structures, which forms of intentionality it enables 
one to see, with the fullness and range of the analyses actually performed by 
H usserl. Our concern here is only with an interpretation of the fundamental 
sense of phenomenology. According to its idea, intentional analytic is the 
development of the problem of evidence, the development of the problem of the 
presentation of the existent itself. According to its method, it is characterized 
as a determining that uncovers. It does not determine something already 
given, something already present. Rather, it discloses what is to be 
determined - which is concealed - for the first time. It raises functioning 
intentionality, which conceals itself in its own results, from unconsciousness 
and establishes it by making it an object. As the awakening, the "explication 
of implications" of intentional sensefulness, intentional analytic is guided by 
the noematic-reflective explication of the object. The objective horizons of 
sense then refer to the clarification of the formations of sense, a clarification 
to be accomplished analytically. 
The specific, methodical characteristic of the phenomenological analysis of 
intentionality, which is shown by the "bringing forth," by the uncovering of 
that which is certainly not something given at first, is easily misunderstood if 
one interprets H usserl's designation for intentional analytic made in the 
contest of his theoretical statements - viz., the title "intentional description" 
54 
- on the basis of the usual type of description instead of, conversely, deriving 
the sense of description from the peculiarity of intentionality. The general 
sense of description, by which is meant a procedure of faithfully rendering 
that which one sees such that it is rendered in the way that he sees it, prior to 
all "explanatory" theories, also remains valid for intentional description. 
However, we are all too easily committed, on the basis of the so-called 
descriptive natural sciences, to the idea that description should be the faithful 
depiction of something present, something given as being present. Intentional 
description, however, is not a depiction of psychic "things" called 
intentionalities that are present in the sphere of consciousness. Intentional 
description is intentional in that it has functioning intentionality as its theme 
and is itself a mode of the functioning. 
This signifies a particularly difficult problem for the conceptualization of the 
phenomenological intentional analytic. It is the question of whether the 
sense-forming, sense-producing life becomes an object in the analytic in the 
same sense that things, that objects in general become objects for us. Is it not 
the case that this analytic shows that the simple consciousness of objects takes 
place on the concealed ground of an active, functioning system of intentional 
sense-formation? Is that by which we have things and objects conceptually 
determinable by the concepts which apply to things and objects? 
In its essential formulation, this is the question concerning the being of 
intentionality. By this question, the interlacing of the two moments of the 
phenomenological problem of the presentation of the existent itself makes 
itself felt. Because the being of intentionality has not been clarified, the 
intentional analytic of the originary evidences of the existent articulated in 
accordance with eidetic universalities faces the disturbing problem which 
drives it beyond what has here been characterized as the formulation of the 
fundamental question of phenomenology. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
'Consternation or terror. 
bThat which stands under. 
'In this essay, Fink completes sections A and B of this proposed project. 
dCommunion 
AUTHOR'S NOTES 
I. The following exposition forms the first part of a book with the same title. The 
space available here necessitates our limiting the discussion to the formulation 
[Ansatz] of the problem of phenomenology. 
2. Cf. Plato, Theaetetus, l55D: "This sense of wonder is the mark of the 
55 
philosopher. Philosophy indeed has no other origin, and he was a good 
genealogist who made Iris the daughter of Thaumas." In addition, cf. Aristotle, 
Metaphysics, 982b II: "For it is owing to their wonder that men both now and at 
first began to philosophize." 
3. E. Husserl, Ideas, Section 24, p. 84. 
OPERATIVE CONCEPTS IN HUSSERL'S PHENOMENOLOGY* 
EUGEN FINK 
When attempting to discuss the operative concepts of H usserl's 
phenomenology, one cannot simply present a report, an apology or a critique, 
for each of these above all involves taking a theoretical position on what is 
expressed in a philosophical doctrine, on the ideas that a thinker made 
thematic. Certainly any such position-taking, as long as it arises out of 
philosophical interest, is guided by a reference to the matter in question. It is 
because we strive for truth that we read what philosophers have written; we try 
to penetrate through what they say to the "matter" [Sache] which stood before 
their eyes and was the theme of their mental glance. In following and 
understanding what they said about the matter of thought [die Sache des 
Denkens] we hope to approach this matter itself. Whether one presents, 
defends or criticizes a philosophy, one presupposes that philosophy is above 
all an attempt to express something which is true. Our participation in the 
truth of a philosophical doctrine makes possible a genuine and just 
presentation, defence, or criticism. The appropriate relation to a philosophy is 
obviously that of philosophizing-along-with. Philosophizing-along-with 
takes the form of a sharing in our common relation to the matter of thought. 
We have here, as it were, a redoubled thematic: the philosophizing thought 
becomes a "theme" with respect to its assertions about what, for itself, is the 
original theme. 
Sometimes, to be sure, a shift of interest occurs, for instance, when the 
thoughts of a thinker are exhibited not for the sake of their possible truth. but 
for their symptomatic significance, as when one sees in them documents of the 
times, existential attitudes or social manifestations. It is incontestable that 
philosophical statements are always also socio-historical symptoms; they are 
evidence for the greatness and misery of our finite existence. But they are not 
merely testimonials to the life of man. They cannot be adequately 
comprehended by psychological or sociological categories, for in philosophy 
man does not remain in the closed compass of his life. In understanding he 
*Translated by William McKenna from Eugen Fink. "Operative Begriffe in 
Husserls Phanomenologie." Niihe und Distanz (Freiburg i. Br.lMiinchen: Verlag Karl 
Alber, 1976); originally published in Zeitschrijt!ur philosophische Forschung, Band 
XI (1957), pp. 321-37. 
56 
57 
reaches into the farthest corners of the universe, and seeks to determine all 
that is in accordance with its sense: the depths of the earth and the heights of 
heaven, Gods and men, land and sea, animals and plants, natural and artificial 
things. sensible and mathematical [Zahlenhaft-figurales] objects, things 
which simply are and things which are creations offreedom, like, for example, 
institutions. Man questions all such things. asking for their specific character 
[Art-Charakter] (eidos) and thinglyness (substantiality). He calls it 
"being" [das "Seiende"r and, in thinking, he is filled with wonder at Being an 
entity [Seiendsein] as such, at actuality and possibility. at Being. becoming 
and appearing, at the relatedness of thought to Being and the capacity of 
beings to be thought. 
In everyday life, to be sure, man avails himself ofthese distinctions without 
thinking - he makes use of them, but he does not explicitly reflect on them. 
Philosophy has the peculiar task of fixing the understanding of Being, 
thoughtlessly employed in everyday life, from the detachment of an original 
wonder, of unsettling it and probing it by thinking it out. However, no valid 
criterion for this examination exists beforehand, rather the criterion is 
precisely what is most questionable. The "ontology of everyday life" seems to 
be "ready-made." One uses with ease and familiarity the requisite distinctions 
of "things" and "property," "form" and "matter," "essence" and 
"appearance," "actuality" and "possibility," "fact" and "ideal," but one does 
not think them over when employing them. They nonetheless appear to 
express something that everyone more or less understands. The "ontology of 
philosophy" in contrast is by no means ready-made and settled once and for 
all, it is open. All thinking wherein we try to conceptualize Being penetrates 
deeper and deeper into the unfathomable. However, philosophy, in its quest, 
does not always just proceed from the unquestionability of everyday life. 
Rather, its impulse dies out again and again in the course of history and it 
sinks down into something which is a matter of course and ordinary - it ends 
in everyday acceptance. The usual, unquestioned and everyday understanding 
that man has of Being is prephilosophical and also postphilosophical. There is 
a peculiar kind oftension between philosophizing and the normal way of life. 
Philosophy does not merely introduce a distrust, a skeptical doubt and an 
extreme suspicion into the general trust in being of non-philosophizing 
existence, it also introduces a distrust into its own distrust and suspects that it 
is itself. in its endless quest, placed in question by that basic unquestionability. 
Reflection does not unconditionally have a higher rank than the naivete oflife. 
Taken ontically, "Spirit" [Geist] is a passion of man, perhaps the most fearful, 
yet at the same time, most fruitful passion. Aristophanes' jesting at Socrates' 
brooding and chiseling away at concepts is perhaps always justified.b 
Once we leave aside such reservations, we can ask: In what does turning 
thematically to a philosophy consist? One can answer: It consists in thinking 
along with, reflecting on, and thinking over the ideas that a thinker has 
58 
verbally formulated and expressed concerning the matter of thought and 
which he has set down in the form of a book. But here many problems arise. 
What is the matter of thought? Is it an object [GegenstandJ that is accessible to 
all? Does the usual and current understanding of "subject matter" [Sache] 
suffice to give valid information here? Do the thoughts of a thinker always 
concern the same object? With some entity or other or with the highest entity 
- or with all existing things in general? Even if philosophy essentially arises 
from wonder, the finding of particular things or subject matters is perhaps less 
characteristic of it than is a rational interpretation of being a matter [Sachheit] 
as such, an interpretation of the being [Seiendheit] of things which are. The 
"theme" of philosophizing, so to speak, cannot be determined outside of 
philosophizing at all. Philosophy does not only inquire into something 
concealed, hidden or disguised; it is itself, with respect to its theme, continually 
questionable. But if it cannot even unequivocally clearly and surely be said 
what the proper theme of philosophy is, a report on a philosophical statement 
documented in literary form, or even an apology or criticism of one is a still 
more precarious affair. For here an interpretation of verbal meaning is 
always involved, but the sort of verbal meaning that does not concern 
something established and commonly known, but which attempts to express 
the unsettling of all established acquaintance. The thoughts of a thinker 
cannot be "reported on" like other opinions and theses which stem from the 
unquestioned human life-world. Since philosophy, in its concrete thematic, is 
already "interpretation," is already a speculative determination of what being 
an existent is for all existing things, the report on a philosophy is unavoidably 
an interpretation of an interpretation. 
There is already a controversy as to what the thematic basic concepts of a 
given philosophy are. To be sure such basic concepts are usually explicitly 
named by each thinker and strongly stressed. Nevertheless, there is often a 
related controversy between interpreters who are following and 
understanding an author, interpreters who occasionally want to understand 
the author better than he had understood himself, or who seek to draw into the 
light what is silently in the background, the esoteric heart of his world of 
thought. Our discussion of the operative concepts of H usserl's 
phenomenology is not oriented toward such a venture. Here, it will not be a 
matter of superelevating Husserl's thoughts, if ever so little, as if we were like 
the sparrow, who, borne high by the eagle, by beating his wings upward rises 
slightly higher. Many times the exaltation of a thinker is attempted by 
epigones after the model of striving to exhibit methodological naivetes and 
unproved presuppositions in his philosophy or by assigning him a place in a 
constructed course of history during which he is overtaken "with historical 
necessity" by the thinkers who come after him. One can certainly speak of the 
operative concepts of a philosophy as "methodological naivetes," as 
"unproved assumptions," or even as "historically conditioned" and the like. 
59 
But then the sense which is here decisively important still remains in the fog of 
generality. Not every naive presupposition of a thinker is an operative 
concept. C Thus we must first of all attempt to indicate what we mean by the title 
"operative concept." 
We terminologically distinguish "thematic" from "operative concepts." 
Thinking (taken in the philosophical sense) is the ontological 
[seinsbegriffliches] understanding of the reality of the world and of what is in 
the world. Thinking remains in the milieu of the concept. Conceptualization 
in philosophy aims intentionally at those concepts in which thought fixes and 
preserves what is being thought. We call these concepts "thematic concepts." 
Of course such thematic concepts of a philosophy are never univocal, free of 
problems; rather they contain the whole tension of an understanding which is 
aimed towards the ineradicable enigmatic character of being as such. The 
concept of "idea" in Plato, of "ousia," '"dynamis" and "energeia" in Aristotle, 
of "hen" in Plotinus, of "monad" in Leibniz, of "transcendental" in Kant, of 
"Geist" or of "absolute idea" in Hegel, of "will to power" in Nietzsche, of 
"transcendental subjectivity" in H usserl - all the like are fundamental 
thematic concepts which must be reflected upon if we want to reach the 
dimension of the problem of the thinker at all. 
But in the formation of thematic concepts, creative thinkers use other 
concepts and patterns of thought, they operate with intellectual schemata 
which they do not fix objectively. They think through certain cognitive 
presentations toward the basic concepts which are essentially their themes. 
Their understanding moves in a conceptualfield, in a conceptual medium that 
they are not at all able to see. They expend intermediate lines of thought to set 
up that which they are thinking about. We call that which in this way is readily 
expended and thought through in philosophical thinking, but not considered 
in its own right, operative concepts. They form, metaphorically speaking, the 
shadow of a philosophy. The clarifying power of a way of thinking is 
nourished by what remains in the shadow of thought. An immediacy still has 
its effect in the most intensified reflectivity. Thinking itself is grounded in what 
remains unconsidered. It has its productive impetus in the unreflective use of 
concepts that remain in the shadow. However, this is not meant as a 
psychological statement about the mental processes involved in thinking, nor 
as a reference to an anthropological fact of our finitude. Rather there is 
something essential here. Philosophical thinking is never omniscience. The 
human grasping of what is comes about on the whole in concepts of totality, 
but not in a way that the All could be revealed in a completely clarified, 
shadowless universal concept. The human grasping of the world thinks the 
totality in a thematic world-concept which is, however, a finite perspective 
because concepts are expended in its formulation, concepts which, as a result, 
remain in the shadow. For philosophy itself this is a constant scandal and a 
disconcerting embarrassment. Philosophy tries again and again to jump over 
60 
its own shadow. This assumes many forms, both insignificant and radical. An 
epistemology of philosophical knowing is demanded, a methodology of its 
method, a reflection on implicit presuppositions, a self-criticism of its critical 
spirit, or a typology of world views and "forms ofthought." But it is a question 
whether this could bring the operative concepts of a philosophy into view. For 
example, if we carry out a reflection on a certain philosophical act of thought 
and then reflect on this reflecting, we could, in this way, pursue an endless 
chain of interconnected experiences without at any time moving out of that 
thematic light of comprehension [Verstiindnishelle] in which the first 
experience was given to us. But forcing our mental glance back onto that with 
which and through which the thematic light of comprehension had been 
formulated in the first place, involves something else. This requires a further 
explication. 
We speak, in pedagogy, for instance, of an educative "shaping" and 
"forming" of a pupil by the educator or else of a handling which tends and 
cultivates, a careful escorting and "letting grow." In the pedagological 
situation such ways of speaking are fully understandable although they are 
metaphors. In order to conceptually formulate that relationship of educator 
and pupil in which human beings are shaped, we spontaneously and 
unreflectively make use of concepts which actually have their place in the 
relation of men to nonhuman things, in the work-world of craftsmen or 
farmers. We formulate this relationship of being-together [co-existenzielle] in 
technical categories. We apply concepts to a relationship offellow-men which 
are ultimately unfitting and alien to it. We operate with analogical notions 
without investigating the extent of the analogy. But does the educator actually 
shape the pupil in a manner analogous to the way the smith shapes iron, does 
he tend and cultivate him as does the farmer the seeds? And can the work-
world for its part be grasped so readily with adequate concepts? The work-
world is a fundamental existential dimension of man, but, for this very reason, 
it is bound to other spheres of life which are equally fundamental. So it 
becomes apparent even here that often the interpretation of one dimension of 
human existence uses or expends the categories of another dimension. 
Perhaps the greatness and impressive closed ness and consistency 
[Geschlossenheit] of the Marxist interpretation of life rests on thematically 
taking "work" as the real essence of man. But in order to explain work, Marx 
uses and expends categories of domination, he formulates the history of the 
economic process as a history of class conflict. The operative employment of 
categories of domination in the thematic interpretation of the work-world is 
itself not clarified further. This is not said as a reproach. After all there is a 
profound necessity here. For instance, if we reflect on time, we grasp it 
perhaps as the all-embracing unitary nexus of all events and occurrences. We 
distinguish the thing in lime from time itse((: The being-in-time of a temporal 
entity has the characteristics of rest and movement. Being at rest and being 
61 
moved are possible ways in which an entity is in time. But in order to grasp rest 
conceptually, we operate repeatedly with concepts derived from the horizon 
of movement, and vice versa. Rest and movement are explained by one 
another. But if "being moved" is a possible way that an entity can be in time, 
why, and with what right, do we also speak of a movement of time itself, of a 
flow of time? Why and with what right do we employ concepts belonging to 
the way entities are in time to time itself? Must not the movement of the 
temporal flow itself in turn then be in a time, and, thus, there would be a time 
of time of time, and so forth? On the basis of time, we understand movement, 
and on the basis of movement, time. Isn't that a vicious circle? Philosophy 
answers this by referring to the "speculative proposition" [spekulativen Satz], 
which takes up the naive, natural sense of a word, but at the same time goes 
beyond it, expending it as a metaphor which has broken down. Time, which 
does not flow like the water in a brook, is nonetheless considered to be a 
"flowing. " Or even more fundamentally: in philosophy we speak of Being as if 
it were an existing thing and nonetheless we are cognizant of a fundamental 
distinction between Being and something which is. Or we explicate structures 
of Being and in doing so covertly employ temporal concepts; or we inquire 
into time and in doing so ask what and how it "is." In the thematic explication of 
Being, we remain operatively within the light which the understanding oftime 
provides, and vice versa. The Platonic dialogue Parmenides provides a well-
known and compelling example of the relation of the thematic and the 
operative where "on" and "hen, "being and one are reciprocally determined. If 
"on" is determined and stands in the light, "hen" remains in the shadow; if 
"hen" is "thematically" thought, "on" is "operatively" thought. 
But to say something is put in the operative "shadow" does not mean that it 
would be out of the way as it were, outside our interest. Rather, it is the interest 
itself. It is not "in the theme" because we relate to the theme through it. It is 
what is not seen because it is the medium of seeing. If the tension between 
thematic and operative concepts belongs to the unrest of philosophy, which, in 
trying to jump over its own shadow, devises hypercritical methodologies of its 
own methodology, or speaks of the necessary "circle of understanding," of the 
"speculative proposition," of the repeatedly disavowed reification of Being, 
which is not a thing, of the inadequacy of innerworldly categories for the 
world-whole -
this is valid as well, in a special way, for Husserls 
phenomenology. For here, this tension is not merely "in itself," or for us, who 
strive to understand phenomenology. Rather, precisely this tension becomes a 
theme for Husserl's thinking. 
2 
What was just said might sound like an exaggeration. One could doubt 
whether the opposition and tension between thematic and operative concepts 
62 
in human philosophizing can be definitively objectified and thus to a certain 
extent overcome and resolved. If it could be, then the finitude of our thought 
would be reduced to a knowable and surveyable state of affairs. Between a 
finite being, who could know his limitations unambiguously, dependably and 
clearly, and the all-knowing god there would be only a difference in degree in 
the scope of knowledge. To claim to be able to draw the boundaries of human 
reason with unmistakable surety, to mark out the field of what we can know a 
priori, fencing it off from the unknowable sphere of "belief," comes close to 
equating human philosophy with divine knowledge. The difference between 
Kant and Hegel is not too great. Now it cannot be said of H usserl 's 
philosophy that it ever made such an unconditional claim. But, in an essential 
way, it is a remarkable attempt to "fix" the inner unrest of human thinking 
through a methodological comprehension. The extent to which concepts still 
remain in the operative shadow of thought in this undertaking is a second 
question. 
The first question is: How does Husserl understand the opposition of and 
tension between theme and medium of understanding? We can answer that it is 
precisely his fundamental method of "phenomenological reduction" which is 
concerned with this opposition. The theory of the "reduction" interprets, in a 
decidedly original way, the universal thematic of human living, but does so 
with a view toward what is athematically presupposed by this thematic. 
H usserl calls the basic thematic attitude of humanity the natural attitude. 
Living in it, we are immersed in the world and are directed towards the things 
we encounter as objects. Here we can leave out of consideration the fact that 
this natural attitude is many-layered, and contains a basic level called the 
life-world upon which is founded first the world of science. In the ordinary 
living of our lives we are thematically turned towards the things, the objects 
that emerge from the encompassing world-horizon and confront us, objects 
that we perceive, desire, handle or contemplate. Every specific turning 
towards things sets a single theme off from the universal theme; but the 
continual change of individual themes remains entirely within the thematic 
world-field of the natural attitude. H usserl sees the task of philosophy first of 
all in the self-assurance of world-related man with respect to his theme, the 
world. Philosophical thinking makes the general theme of human life into its 
object; it tries to thematize this life-theme as such. For that reason Husserl 
takes up the Cartesian motive of epoche. But one understands it too hastily if 
one sees the moment of non-acceptance in the method of epoche above all else, 
i.e., that suspension of the previous world-theme and throwing off of the 
initial "naivete." Rather we must contemplate precisely this naivete as such, 
we must watch ourselves, so to speak, as we participate in our own world-
theme. As experiencing human beings we cannot cease believing in the Being 
of the world, but as thinking onlookers "we abstain" from this thematic 
believing in Being, we perform the epocht':o 
63 
We split ourselves into one who experiences and one who observes that 
experiencing. A great effort is required on the part of the thinker to maintain 
this methodological schizophrenia, especially if it is not to be a brief passing 
reflection, but a habitual attitude of research. In the process of holding on to 
the world-theme as such, more and more athematic presuppositions of the 
natural attitude come into the perview of thought. We are, for example, led 
from the perceived things to the givenness of aspects, to the perspectives, to 
the manifold phenomena of consciousness in which the objective sense of 
things becomes a given for us. From this point on we also pay attention to the 
subjective experiencing previously only, so to speak, lived-through [durch-
lebte] and not grasped objectively. Prior to this we had only a rough 
knowledge of our own modes of experience. But at this point it becomes 
increasingly clear to us that in order to fully understand the world, which we 
naively experienced as a theme in the natural attitude, it is also necessary to 
understand the experiences that we otherwise live through and are not aware 
of explicitly. What we previously operated with by living it [erlebendJ 
becomes an object of a consistent reflection, of a methodical investigation. 
With this the field of transcendental subjectivity in Husserl's sense is opened 
up. 
This presentation could be criticized by saying that the opposition of "the 
thematic" and "the operative" is referred to experience [Erleben] in general, 
and not to concepts. Certainly. But by distinguishing the experiencing 
[Erleben] involved in the natural attitude and the conceptual experiences of 
transcendental reflection, Husserl succeeds in forming a new conception. Of 
course he does not merely come by new concepts as does a scientific researcher 
in discovering a new sphere of objects; he achieves a conceptual expression of 
something that we certainly always lived through but never properly grasped 
as an object. In exhibiting the operative presuppositions of life for the human 
world-thematic, operative concepts, which we normally use in the 
interpretation of things, are brought out of the shadow. In H usserl's theory of 
the phenomenological reduction, not only is the important distinction 
between theme and athematic medium of understanding, through which and 
in which the theme appears, elaborated in all its detail, but at the same time it 
is methodologically fixed. Husserl's philosophy doesn't just "operate" with 
the distinction of theme and operation, it also thematizes it expressly, for 
instance with the terms "naivete" and "ref1ection," "natural" and 
"transcendental attitude." 
3 
Nevertheless, the question which remains is whether or not, in spite of this, 
Husserl's philosophy still operates with concepts which remain thematically 
64 
unclarified. Perhaps no human philosophy at all is in full, complete and 
"shadow-free" self-possession of all its concepts, has them in the clear, 
penetrating light of truth. Otherwise the entire history of thinking would be at 
an end, and, as Hegel thought, philo-sophy could then in fact abandon its 
name of "love of wisdom," because it would have become complete and 
absolute knowing. But doesn't an absolute knowing which "becomes" at all, 
which follows a course and has a history, and essentially must return home 
through alienation and externalization contradict the idea of absoluteness? 
Hegel mastered this contradiction because he defined the absolute as 
contradiction, as the "opposite of itself," because he took into Being non-
being as negativity. But does Husserl enable us to understand the origin of the 
naivete of the natural attitude? Don't we always return to this naivete once we 
have performed the reduction and have entered the absolute ground of 
transcendental subjectivity? Certainly a phenomenological praxis is possible 
which is not explicitly assured of the transcendental horizon at every step. A 
psychology is also possible which apparently returns to the horizon of the 
natural attitude. In truth, however, this phenomenological psychology is only 
a selective darkening of the deep transcendental layers. For once natural life 's 
naivete about its world-theme is broken through by the phenomenological 
reduction, this naivete can no longer return, it is broken through forever. But 
this in no way means that we then always live in the light of transcendental 
self-understanding. The break which splits open the concealing shell can no 
longer be closed. Once someone becomes certain of himself as a constituting 
subjectivity, he can no longer assume his previous relation to things with the 
old indifference. He must now know himself as the "center of the world" in a 
peculiar sense. Of course this should not be understood in the primitive sense 
of an appraisal of himself as the most important being in the universe. It is not 
a matter of rank which every I, as a thinking thing, assumes among many 
other things, but of the transcendental priority of constituting life to all 
constituted sense formations. As long as I interpret myself as a human being 
in the world, as a member of a species of organisms and natural creatures, this 
interpretative character is itself a constituted sense and therefore simply 
cannot be attributed to the transcendental subject-for-the-world. The 
constitution of the mundane character of the subject, in which it conceals its 
originality as prior to the world, was not carried out by H usserl in a 
sufficiently explicit and convincing manner. 
It is for this reason that Husserl's concept of phenomenon curiously shows 
a play of colors. Not only may several meanings be distinguished in it, but also 
several levels of thought. The expression "phenomenon" has also a current, 
well-known sense within the naivete of the "natural attitude." There it means 
first of all the thing which shows itself, the thing in its appearing. An existing 
thing shows itself in that it emerges in the medium of that universal presence 
which we usually call the world's reality. As something which exists from 
65 
itself in this manner, as the thing [Ding] standing on its own, it is the valid 
measure for all human opining and speaking about matters [Sachen]. The 
thing as "thing itself" [Sache selbst] opens up the possibility of human access 
to it by its appearing. The adequacy of human utterance about a thing is 
mediated by the self-appearing of the thing. The maxim "to the things 
themselves" [zu den Sachen selbst] already presupposes a plurality of modes 
of human knowledge that have access to the self-appearing of an entity. A 
shift in the meaning of the concept "phenomenon" takes place when the thing 
[Ding] is taken as object [Gegenstandj - and only as object. In being an object, 
an entity is related to the human power of presenting an object; it is the 
intentional correlate of a sUbjective system. To be sure a conceptual 
distinction can still be made here between the thing itself and its being an 
object for us. But the focal point of interest is already in the analysis of the 
subjective experiences in which the thing comes to givenness for us. The 
familiar reasoning appears: but we have no other things at all of which we 
could be able to talk sensefully than the ones we perceive in our perceptions, 
encounter in our encounters, think in our thoughts. A thing-in-itself free from 
our subjective system of intentionality is a concept which has no sense. The 
phenomenon is interpreted in its phenomenality primarily on the basis of the 
horizon of presentation [Vorstellung]. But the act of presenting [Vorstellen] is 
itself still understood in the way that the human subject of such acts, living in 
the natural attitude, understands them: The act of presenting does not 
produce the entity which is presented. At most, it only brings about the being-
an-object of something existent. When one speaks on this level of a 
constitution of objects in the experiences of a natural human subject, 
"constitution" means only the building up of the intentional sense in which 
something is given - but not the production of it. For example, occasionally it 
happens that an intentional sense of an object is built up in sUbjective 
experiences and after a certain time, disintegrates again into nothing, perhaps 
into a hallucination, a perceptual illusion and the like. We distinguish, then, 
the sUbjective sense of an object from the thing itself, the merely sUbjective 
phenomenon from a phenomenon which is grounded and validated in the 
thing itself. But with the help of this distinction, we can then again distinguish 
in the presentational sense related to something, the sheer object sense, and its 
"thetic character." Through the blocking of our positing performance, thus 
through an epoche of the positing of Being, we transform (for ourselves) the 
existing thing into a "phenomenon." But here pheno!llenon does not mean 
that which shows itself, but an "appearance" [Schein] which shows itself, so to 
speak a "neutralized" entity, stripped of its thetic character. But what, within 
the natural attitude, is to a certain extent a rare occurrence, namely the epoche, 
the abstention from belief with respect to the being of a determinate and 
individual entity, Husser! takes up and employs as a guiding methodological 
66 
model to break open the "natural attitude" as a whole. The naivete of man's 
natural life-thematic is interpreted as the universal and continuous 
performance of belief in a general thesis. The beginning of philosophy is put 
forth as a critical neutralization of the belief in the world. The conceptual 
means that Husserl employs to break through the imprisonment in the world 
of natural living, and with which he operates in the fundamental method of 
his philosophy, he takes directly from the sphere which he wants to break 
through. 
The problem for us to consider here is whether there. is not, as a 
consequence of this, ultimately an indeterminateness in the operative 
concepts of epoche and reduction. But this is not at all to say that Husser! has 
not made very comprehensive and subtle statements about his basic method, 
nor that the works he left behind do not deal with this in numerous 
manuscripts. Epoche and reduction are certainly also "thematic concepts" of 
his thinking. But our question is: do operative shadows remain despite the 
comprehensive discussion of these central concepts and despite the 
heightened methodological self-consciousness of Husserlian 
phenomenology. Within the horizon of the "natural attitude" the concept of 
phenomenon has at least five meanings which we have already distinguished: 
I) the thing in its appearing in general, 2) the thing in the sphere of human 
presentifying, 3) the thing interpreted as the correlate of a subjective system of 
presentifications (thus excluding the "thing-in-itself'), 4) the intentional sense 
of an object, abstracting from thetic characters, 5) the sense of an object with 
the methodically exercised neutralization of the thetic characters. Since 
Husser! now uses the fifth meaning as a methodological model in order to 
shake the whole"natural attitude" out of its foundations, he obviously must 
speculatively transform this fifth meaning so that it comprises all the other 
meanings, indeed so that it can embrace even itself in its naiveform. Within 
the horizon of naivete, the neutrality modification is certainly only possible 
as the suspension of our belief in the Being of a specific, individual entity. The 
modification remains, therefore, within a comprehensive field of unbroken 
belief, on the ground of the world. But to treat the general thesis, in which this 
world-ground is posited, as a singular thesis can be treated, to "neutralize" the 
thesis of the wor!d in a manner analogous to an intra-worldly epochc 
this 
necessarily signifies an explosive tension between the natural sense of a model 
and its new universal function. For the neutralization which is now attempted 
is to result in a neutralization of the universal situation within which the 
method of epoche, until this attempt, had a limited sense and was borne and 
comprehended by an unbroken belief in Being. Husserl did not sufficiently 
recognize this tension between the prior "natural" sense of epoche and the 
new "transcendental" sense of a neutralization of world-belief as a problem. 
Furthermore, when elaborating upon the transcendental withholding of 
belief, he frequently spoke on the basis of the horizon of understanding 
67 
belonging to the neutralized phenomenon in the "natural attitude." 
These two facts are signs of an operative shadow at the center of his 
philosophy. As a consequence of this shadow a series of other main concepts 
remain unclarified. Through the basic: method of the reduction, Husserl 
opens up the field of absolute subjectivity in whose intentional life-processes 
all worldly objectivities are "built up." SelJ-temporalization is attributed to 
this absolute subjectivity, and the "constitution" of mundane entities is 
attributed to its self-temporalized intentional life. But what does constitution 
mean? From whence is this concept determined? Doesn't it first of all have a 
naive sense within the horizon of the "natural attitude?" Constitution, 
literally translated as "putting together," can obviously be a putting together 
in many ways. "Putting together" [Zusammenstellung] can mean putting 
things in an order; or, on the other hand, making and producing things; or 
even ordering our representations [Vorstellungen] of things; or producing the 
objective sense of things which are given to us by way of representations. 
When Husserl takes the concept of constitution at first from the naive use of 
the word and assigns to it a novel, transcendental sense all these meanings are 
echoed in each. But this assignment does not happen in such a way as to bring 
out the distance between the speculative concept and the naive, natural 
model. This is true as well of the nearly synonymous concept "production" 
[Leistung]. The life of transcendental subjectivity is characterized as a 
"productive life." What we usually call existing things are results of SUbjective 
performances [Leistungen]; mundane things are indices for systems of 
intentional performances [Leistens]. Roughly, this may be understood as 
follows: Things do not exist independently in themselves, they are necessarily 
related to subjectivity; they are poles of unity in which, in aiming toward 
them, manifold acts and habitualities of the subject are unified, synthetically 
brought together. But to what extent is this SUbjective system of presentation a 
production? What is produced here, and how? Naively, no doubt, the term 
"performance" may be understood as a doing that has a result, a consequence, 
that brings something about. But this can be understood in a crude or in 
a subtle manner. Roughly understood, it means a production, a making or 
manufacturing. The craftsman performs beautifully when he turns out a 
technical piece of work in a masterful way. But also an orator performs 
beautifully when he is able to say the true thing in an agreeable way. Or 
love can be a rare production of the human heart. It is not accidental that 
H usserl takes such concepts from the naive sphere to designate the reference 
of the transcendental subject to the world of things, that he uses and expends 
concepts which, even in their proper sphere, are characterized by an 
unresolved indeterminacy. This indeterminateness increases with the 
speculative transformation of the concepts of constitution and production. 
The well-known conflict between interpreters, over whether there is, in 
Husser!, an epistemological idealism, in which the subject produces [erzeuge] 
68 
the world of objects, or whether there is a realistic position, in which the basic 
character of knowing is essentially receptive, cannot be dogmatically decided. 
This is because in the "natural" sense of the terms "constitution" and 
"production" everything is already left open and the field to which the 
distinction between a production [ErzeugungJ of things and a receptive 
understanding of them is indigenous is indeed transcended through Husserl's 
transcendental philosophical use of these terms. Surely one can say: Husserl's 
concepts of constitution and production stand beyond the alternatives of 
"making" [Erzeugen] and "receiving" [Vernehmen]. But, then, what is 
positively meant by them is not conceptually clear. 
Nevertheless, with these basic concepts which remain in an operative 
shadow of thought, Husserl unfolded the immense and extremely fruitful 
intellectual task of exploring the intentional systems of subjectivity. An 
essential problem here is the distinction between the transcendental 
interpretation of intentional experiences, which are related to non-human 
things, and those in which fellow men and co-subjects of the objective world 
are experienced. Obviously the constitution of things is somehow different 
from the constitution of co-subjects. Although Husserl makes highly 
interesting and subtle analyses here to separate the self-consciousness of 
transcendental intersubjectivity from the universal consciousness of objects 
related to things, the concept of constitution nevertheless does not attain 
sufficient clarity. This perhaps has its deeper reason in the fact that Husserl 
had not yet posed to himself the problem of a "transcendental language. "The 
phenomenologist, who carries out the red uction, cognitively puts himself at a 
distance from the "natural attitude," but does so not to leave it behind, rather 
to understand it as a sense formation of the sense-constituting transcendental 
life. But, to take it strictly, in doing this he steps outside of the situation in 
which human speech is fashioned as the naming of things, the call to the gods, 
the conversation with fellow men. Can he still be master of the logos in the 
same sense as before? Doesn't the problem of a transformation of the act of 
speaking [Sagens] arise in the speculative proposition? Here is another 
unilluminated shadow in Husserl's thought. He uses "transcendental 
concepts" but he does not clarify their possibility. In the work Formal and 
Transcendental Logic, questions of sense constitution are put to formal logic 
and a clarification is attempted by going back to the constitutive sense-
bestowing processes. However no logic of transcendental expressions 
themselves is elaborated. The connection between speech and the 
transcendental-phenomenological understanding of Being remains in the 
dark. 
69 
4 
Let us bring our considerations together. Although Husserl, in his 
methodology, has inquired into the remarkable relationship that we 
designated as the difference between "thematic" and "operative" media of 
understanding, and, indeed, has to a certain extent expressly thematized this 
distinction in the theory of the "phenomenological reduction," the central 
concepts of his thought remain in the twilight. The concepts of phenomenon, 
epoche, constitution, performance and transcendental logic are by far used 
more operatively than they are thematically clarified. They all represent 
problems which are still open. To see that these problems are not yet resolved 
is not to make an unsuitable criticism of Husserl, nor is it to overpasHhis 
thinker. The presence of a shadow is an essential feature of finite 
philosophizing. The more original the force which ventures to open a clearing, 
the deeper are the shadows which accompany basic thoughts. Only God 
knows without shadows. 
It could be asked whether the operative constraint which great thinkers 
labor under is a tribute which they, too, must pay to human frailty. Isn't it an 
old, traditional and venerable idea to interpret man on the basis of his distance 
from God and on that basis to explain human wisdom as bounded, confined 
and imperfect? But isn't this thought precisely an operative presupposition of 
Western metaphysics? Doesn't it lie in the essence of Being to be in the light 
and dark at the same time, to be at once the gleam of the appearing and the 
closed abyss. Isn't man, when in the ecstasy of thinking, evidence of such a 
double notion of the world? However that may be, it is only in view of the ideal 
"absolute truth," in which everything that is would be transfigured in the light 
and raised up to knowledge, that the shadow of human philosophy appears as 
a lack, as poverty, as weakness. It could be, however, that man only comes to 
his own essence when he no longer engages in the hopeless competition with 
the gods. 
The shadow of finite truth became an explicit theme in a special sense at the 
beginning of metaphysics, with Plato. What we mortals usually call "that 
which is" was declared there to be a mere shadow-image of the idea. The idea 
alone exists truly. Man can catch sight of it in the almost super-human 
possibility of thinking, standing in the radiance of the Good [zuhochst im 
Sonnenglanz des Agathon].d Plato took the conceptual means by which he 
devaluated earthly reality from that sensuous world itself; it is in the sphere of 
sensuous light that there are shadows. He referred operatively back to the 
"horatos topos," while he transgressed it in the theme of his thought. 
To point out "shadows" in the monumental conceptual work of the man to 
whom this conference is dedicated does not contradict the respect which is due 
him, above all does not contradict Husserl's passionate sincerity nor the 
attitude with which he worked. Such a reference remains an insufficient 
70 
attempt to indicate a hidden dialectic which phenomenology as philosophy 
leaves open. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
a"Being" (with a capital "B") will be used to translate "Sein": "being," "entity." 
"what is," to translate "Seiende." 
bThe reference here is no doubt to Aristophanes' The Clouds. 
C As in this sentence, we have often made less frequent use of typographical 
emphasis than does Fink. 
dSee Plato, Republic, Book VII. 
A TRANSCENDENT AL-PHENOMENOLOGlCAL INVESTIGATION 
CONCERNING UNIVERSAL IDEALISM, INTENTIONAL 
ANALYSIS AND THE GENESIS OF HABITUS* 
AReHE. PHANSIS. HEXIS. LOGOSa 
GERHARD FUNKE 
The problem of phenomenology is the phenomenon, which is to be 
determined according to its being and sense. In this way, phenomenology, as 
philosophical science, is distinguished from the natural sciences and the 
natural attitude they manifest, an attitude in which man remains "turned 
towards things in both intuition and thinking."1 The possibility of knowledge 
is self-evident in the precritical attitude. Here knowledge means knowledge of 
objects: b the grasping of an object comes about "through the sense immanent 
to the grasping, by means of which the grasping is related to the object."2 The 
task is to elucidate this sense. In this way, it will also be shown what can be 
validly held to be an "object;" that is, whether "object" can be interpreted in 
the sense of the traditional opposition between subject and Object. 
It is a fact that valid objects exist for consciousness, objects that are found 
within consciousness as "a continuous Heraclitean flux of phenomena. "3", 
Therefore, the philosophy of consciousness is not rationalism, which is distant 
from life. Rather, it comprises every study that has phenomenon-containing 
mental acts [Erlebnisse] in both their genetic formation and their static 
moments of sense as its theme. Thus. the phenomenon's showing itself has two 
aspects: It is an appearance in its appearing, an appearing in which something 
is pregiven, and it is an appearance "as what is pregiven. "4 
Problema, then, is not only that set forth as questionable in a 
scientific-technical investigation, something that, as a result, only awaits 
further description and explanation. It is also the "setting forth" as such. As a 
result, inquiry is directed to the continual investigation of the field of 
appearance. which leads from the respective, pregiven points of departure to 
the contextual horizons which are opened up from them. At the same time, it 
*Translated and 
edited 
by 
Robert 
M. 
Harlan from "Transzendental-
phiinomenologishe U ntersuchung i.iber 'U niversalen Idealismus, "Intentionalanalyse' 
und 'Habitusgcnese, '" II compito della jenomen%gia (Padova: CEDAM - Casa 
Editrice Dott. Antonio Milani, 1957). pp. 117-54. Sectional divisions have been added, 
and paragraphs have been altered to conform to English standards. 
71 
72 
is referred to the pregiving, functioning mental acts as such, the acts by which 
something, as something with determination and sense, appears. In a word, 
both the accomplishment [Leistung] of sense-determination and the 
determined sense come into view. 
The phenomenon is the object for critical philosophy in a completely 
different way than it is for natural science, which is turned immediately 
towards the thing. Critical philosophy inquires into the phenomenon's sense 
and being. Moreover, when it is necessary "to clarify the essence of knowledge 
and of the objects of knowledge, then it is a phenomenology of knowledge and 
of the objects of knowledge."5 For assertions can be made only concerning 
that which manifests itself or manifests a determinate sense; therefore, 
concerning the phenomenon. However, everything that appears as a 
phenomenon is determined in a double sense: It is qualified defacto in this or 
that manner as a "this-there," and it is evident ontically as "real," "ideal," 
"axiomatic," "ousia/," etc. In each case, it is a question of the moments of 
sense which pertain to the total sense of the phenomenon. 
The point of departure is the phenomenally evident. The aim, however, 
must be the discovery of the structures "by virtue of which and through which 
the phenomenon manifests and shows itself in its ontic character at any given 
time. "6 The phenomenon "rational (ethical) feelings" belongs to what appears 
as a phenomenon in this respect as does the phenomenon "reality of the 
external world"; the phenomenon "God" belongs in the same way as does the 
phenomenon "social subject. "7 The phenomenological method of 
"bracketing" and "intentional analysis" has the purpose of leading back from 
the world, from the domain of whatever is phenomenally graspable, to the 
sUbjective a priori. 
What is and how it is shows itself only in the cogito. Consequently, when the 
point of departure is the cogito, the question is not how a "subject" acquires 
access to the world or how the world of "Objects" is mirrored in the "subject. " 
For it is precisely the investigation which inquires back to the functioning 
cogitationes that makes clear that everything that signifies at all (including 
subject and Object) is given in cogitationes. 
What must be held to be valid with respect to being and sense first becomes 
evident in cogitationes. This means that the a priori ego cogito cogitatum8 can 
be discovered by starting with the things "by means of a direction of intuition 
and thinking that is the opposite of the natural direction." As a matter offact, 
consciousness is always "with the thing" in the cogito. Nevertheless, 
consciousness bestows sense upon whatever is called a "thing. "To that extent, 
then, an "idealism" - in fact, a transcendental-phenomenological idealism - is 
presented, for it is the function of the cogitationes to establish the sense and 
being of every thing. Therefore, it is correct to say of phenomenology that it is 
a concretely carried out explication of sense. What is constituted in 
accordance with consciousness is performed on the one hand by object-
73 
intentional accomplishments and on the other by accomplishments which 
ground habitus. Thus, a transcendental idealism arises that develops from the 
phenomenon. "The proof of this idealism, therefore, is phenomenology 
itself. "9 
If it is correct that the problem of philosophy is philosophy itself or that the 
problem lies in philosophy's own concept,IO then this holds respectively for 
phenomenology and the phenomenon. Admittedly, this assertion (with 
respect to philosophy) is tenable only when it is not understood that philosophy 
is concerned exclusively with philosophical opinions as the pregivens for 
philosophical-historical research. Without doubt, the problem of philosophy 
is not treated exhaustively by the examination, presentation and critique of 
the available stock of philosophical standpoints and opinions; therefore, by 
dogmatics. Dogmatics themselves are problematic. It can be stated 
incontestably, moreover, that "as soon as a cultural activity is characterized 
by a historical or typological epithet, it is transformed into dogmatics ... 
However, when a spiritual system acquires such a tiltle, not only is its universal 
validity placed in question ... but it is at the same time historicized. "11 The 
ordinary history of philosophy, for which philosophy is a problem solely in 
the sense of such a history of dogmas, certainly is concerned with phenomena 
of this kind (i.e., the appearance of cultural and spiritual history and its 
"development"). 
In contrast to this, the problem of phenomenology is not so much that 
which is immediately accessible. The immediately accessible forms only the 
(wholly anti-solipsistic) point of departure. The historically pregiven, the 
constituted theme and the situative context are all phenomena not only as past 
appearances with determinate senses and fixed significances, but are at the 
same time problems in their appearing. Consequently, consideration is 
directed to the functioning accomplishment and to the appearing of the 
phenomenon; therefore, to the occurrence of the appearing itself. That which 
makes the phenomena possible by pregiving them is also a problem, though 
the phenomena, as already pregiven appearances, admittedly always attract 
attention to themselves to begin with. 
Just as the problem of philosophy is its concept, the theme of 
phenomenology is self-legitimation. The question, then, is simply where a true 
self-legitimation is to begin. In any case, neither a preconceived shift of the 
question to the "epistemological domain" in the traditional sense nor a 
restriction to that "methodology" takes place. Rather, a grounding is required 
that arises from that given evidently in cogitationes. Traditionally, however, 
only reason is able to ground itself. Thus, the departure from the "things 
74 
themselves," from how they are phenomena in cogitationes, refers to 
accomplishments prior to things [ vorsachlichen LeistunJ?en] which effect 
"grounding." With this, the problem of origin emerges in connection with the 
question of idealism. 
Whereas natural science as well as traditional ontology are concerned with 
entities, and whereas they aim at them in a direct attitude (whereby it matters 
little whether these entities are something "physical" or "metaphysical "), a 
"world" of "things" standing over against a "subject" is not found to begin 
with when we begin from the ego cogito coJ?itatum. Rather, the procedure is to 
go back from evidences manifested in the cogitatio to the presuppositions of 
the constituted evidences, presuppositions on the basis of which everything 
that "is" and has "sense" becomes transparent. 
The condition for the possibility of such constitution. as that which makes 
something possible, does not have the same characteristics as that which is 
made possible. If the totality of what is mundane consists of that made 
possible, then that which makes it possible is premundane and cannot be 
understood in accordance with the characteristics pertaining to what is 
constituted, which has first become evident as a result of the accomplishment 
of that which makes the constituted possible. The condition for the possibility 
of experience, in the way that it becomes transparent in the evidences of 
intentional acts and in the occurrence of the living through of ego logical 
habitus, is the genuine arche. 
On this basis we are justified in speaking of "phenomenological 
archaeology" (=arche-ology). For the inquiry back to the origin does not 
mean merely a going back to that prior to things (=subjective), to the 
pregiving (=making possible) and to the preconditioning (=functioning that 
accomplishes), but means an inversion of the natural attitude as well. It is a 
question of 
digging up the constitutive structures whose component parts are concealed, of digging 
up the structures of apperceptive accomplishments of sense, the products of which are 
presented to us in a completed form as the world of experience. The inquiry back to 
and then exposure of the individual accomplishments that produce being-sense, an 
inquiry back finally to the ultimate accomplishment, the "arche" enables the self-
evident unity of the ontic validities founded in different ways on the arche to become 
objects for mind. 12 
It is this arche on the basis of which pregiven "Objectivities," "things," etc. 
are 
possible. These pregivennesses, the completely unsolipsistically 
experienced parts of the world, are what they are in evidences. And since their 
being a thing, being pregiven, being something to which we can refer, etc. first 
appear in evidences, the inquiry into the origin is connected to the inquiry into 
the "non-thing" par excellence; therefore, into subjectivity. Evidence and 
living through, in the way that they are actualized in the experience of objects 
and habitus respectively, are distinctive modes of experience. because "being" 
75 
and "sense" never appear without sUbjectivity. "An absolute beginning, called 
principium in the true sense of laying a foundation, "13 is presented here. 
However, to understand thinking as a "mode of being"14 presupposes a 
pregiving type of cogitatio (one that makes this particular sense evident). The 
"archai," the "principia," could only be found where no orientation by 
pregivennesses takes place and where an original projection manifests itself. 
However, a self-projection occurs only in the underivable going-into-action of 
mind [Auftreten des Geistes]. The phainomenon as appearance refers, in the 
being-thus and how of its evidence, to phansis. That which is ultimately 
constituting can only be absolute subjectivity, sUbjectivity from which all 
determinations of sense and of mental acts originate. It is the subjectivity which 
enables the significance-containing appearances to become evident in their 
appearing. Such a discovery-enabling accomplishment does not lead back 
again to a constituted "subject" but, rather, to "subjectity" [Subjektitiit] par 
excellence. "Subjectity" in this sense -that which makes being aware of and 
having something evidently possible - is found only in the function which 
grounds its own concept. Reason, mind and cogitatio establish themselves 
and only establish themselves by enabling what can be valid as a phainomenon 
to emerge in phansis. That is, this functioning "subjectity" grounds its 
concept, its sense (together with all moments of sense belonging to its sense) 
and its significance itself. 15 
In contrast to this, then, "Objectity" means that a constituted sense is 
present which can be ex perienced as a "this-there" within the framework of the 
grounding accomplishments of sUbjectity, and that this sense is 
"transcendent" in that the sense is something constituted by the constituting 
accomplishment. Any mundanely constituted actuality is related to cogitative 
executions [Vollziige] such that the actuality, in its sense and significance, is 
unconditioned by the hic et nunc, actual cogitationes in the sense of being a 
component of the cogitatio, such that the actuality remains fundamentally an 
intentional correlate of the accomplishments corresponding to it. If the 
actuality is, it is what it is by this attribution. 
The expression "transcendence in immanence"16 means nothing other than 
this. In experience, what is transcendent to the experiencing is the given, the 
phenomenon. The phenomenon shows itself in functioning accomplishments. 
However, that the functioning accomplishment is to be understood as the 
functioning accomplishment of mind, of reason, of cogitative projection 
becomes clear once one notes that only "thinking" (in the broadest sense) 
grounds its "being" and "sense" in its functioning. I? 
II 
The problem to be discussed here lies beyond all questions concerning 
76 
"actuality" and "inactuality," "reality" and "ideality" and "being" and 
"sense." Only the cogitatio can be called self-grounding, for in exercising its 
function, the cogitatio is what it is an object for itself in a turning directed to 
itself, namely thinking. The moment of sense which lies in the concept 
"thinking" becomes a possible object of apprehension only through thinking. 
Though they are connected phansis and phainomenon are to be distinguished 
univocally in this regard. 18 
The attempt to derive "subjectity" is simply nonsensical, because sense can 
only be given in subjective (making possible) accomplishments and because it 
is precisely this subjectity which possesses the rank of "arche," of 
"principium." A derivation of subjective accomplishment would make 
exactly what is questioned vanish; namely, the subjectivity of the functioning 
itself. Any attempt at a derivation Objectifies that to be derived. Moreover, 
the attempt is itself possible only on the ground of the governance of 
subjective executions pertaining to the attempt. Thus, the occurrence of 
reason, the going-into-action of cogitationes, is the origin of that which is 
valid as "being" and "sense." 
The search for "archai" leads away from the phenomena and towards 
phansis which presents evidences. Thus, phenomenology for Husserl 
becomes, in a thoroughly consistent manner, "transcendental phansiology. "19 
What belongs to appearance is the sense-projecting appearing as the process of 
appearing as well as that which appears itself in its particular sense and being. 
Along with the presentation of act-transcendent cogitata, the occurrence of 
object-intentional acts simultaneously temporalizes syntheses of flowing 
consciousness itself. Not only does the "being-thus" ofthe respective, intended 
phainomena appear, but the synthetic accomplishment of phansis as such 
manifests itself as well. Thus, there is nothing odd in saying: "Since the Greek 
expression phansis, in contrast to phainomenon, to that which appears and to 
appearance, designates the appearing itself as a mental process, we shall call 
the sphere in question here the phansiological sphere. "20 That this 
phansiological moment is closely related to the synthetic genesis of habitus of 
consciousness is obvious. 
The moment of the genesis of habitus is distinct from what pertains 
expressly to object-intentional acts.d SUbjectity appears in the former as 
governing and grounding sUbjectity. For, 
each cogito, along with all of its component parts, arises and passes away in the flux of 
mental acts. But the pure subject does not arise and pass away, although it "comes 
forward" and again "withdraws" in its own way. It goes into action and then goes out of 
action. What this is and what the pure subject itself is and does as such we grasp or, 
rather, it grasps in self-perception, which is itself one of its actions. 21 
These actions are, accordingly, "hexiological" actions, which are distinct from 
object-intentional actions. For when we speak of the "I as the substrate of 
77 
habitualities, "22 a hexiological ego is designated that is distinct from 
constituting, primal sUbjectity (as sUbjectity occurs in, e.g., "self-perception') 
and that has first become an ego by the accomplishments of primal subjectity. 
While a transcendence in immanence is connected with object-intentional 
acts, the genesis of habitualities does not have this characteristic in this form. 
Without doubt, pure subjectity or the pure 1 becomes positable as an object 
through its own accomplishing functions and is the correlate of a possible 
consciousness in the cogitatio, "reflection on the l. ''23 To the essence of the 
pure I belongs "the possibility of an originary grasping of itself, a 'self-
perception'; but in that case the corresponding modifications of self-grasping 
also belong to it.. .''24 This possibility is established by the genesis of 
habitualities. Habitualities are formed on the occasion of the intentions of 
objects. Their genesis differs from the constitution of transcendent noemata. 
The I as substrate of habitualities is what it is through the historical execution 
of cogitative accomplishments. Thus, the I is the opposite of the transcendent 
correlate of cogitative accomplishment, a correlate that is precisely a "sense" 
that is atemporal. 
The total complex of the pole of sense is constituted in the flowing 
cogitationes: historical consciousness becomes along with its course as a 
flowing course. For "the ego is constituted for itself, so to speak, in the unity of 
a history."25 Not only is that which has appeared as an appearance and is 
universally available dependent upon the constitutive cogitatio; the unity of 
historical consciousness is dependent upon it as well. 
III 
The phainomenon has sense and significance, phansis is historical. The task 
of phenomenology is, then, to make the intentional processes of 
consciousness visible as accomplishments of constituting, functioning 
sUbjectity. As a result, the whole domain of noemata forms the guiding clue 
for inquiries into the grounding constitution.The whole of mundane history is 
nothing marc than a part of the domain founded by constituting 
accomplishments. The "historical" as such, however, is the appearing of the 
cogitationes themselves. Therefore. the "historical" is phansis, which does not 
lake place without effects but, rather. which grounds hexeis. As a result, 
unitary formations of a new type emerge.26 These formations are of a monadic 
type, ones that are characterized by the fact that an "I think" can accompany 
intentional executions. Neither de Jacto dispositions nor real, empirical 
ha bits of this or that type are meant by this. What is meant is the habitus of the 
pure I. 
What is expressed, then, is that the process of constituting, as noetic, primal 
founding, and not what is constituted, must be taken as the point of 
78 
departure. Thus, a distancing from the Objectively constituted formations 
and a passage back to constitution takes place. The habitualities are the 
sedimentation of primally founding, noetic phansis, and do not designate a 
noematic-Objective phainomenon. One is fully justified in saying that, 
in returning to my habitualities, I do not return to that originally "founded" in its 
Objectivity but. rather, to the execution of the act in which this "founding"took place. 
This is the ground of my ability to return. a ground that abides precisely as a habituality 
and. with that. the fundament of my position-takings executed in regard to it." 
Naturally, the passage back to the transcendental ego is a "deactualization" 
only in the sense that the premundane eogitationes, as sense-forming and 
world-constituting accomplishments, cannot once again be attributed to an 
objective unity of sense that is to be explained by constitutions - therefore, to 
no "part of the world," no "psyche," no "self" in the empirical, defacto sense ... 
and that everything, including Objective time and Objective history, is then to 
be shown to be the accomplishment of the consciousness which temporalizes 
itself in evidences. 
Habituality itself, however, belongs to that which must be so shown. 
Habituality is nothing other than the index for the fact that I am the same I 
that I am; in a word, that the I distinguished by habitualities can find itself in 
the course of its flow of mental acts as the identicall.2~ This depends on the I's 
having become a unity in phansis, not on the fact that it. for example. has 
formed determinate, phenomenal particularities and habits and what types 
these are. 
The transcendental ego, the ego we ourselves are as the centers of 
constitutive sense-formation prior to all mundane self-apprehension, is not 
to be defined abstractly. On the one hand, the transcendental ego is to be 
disclosed with the help of an analytic inquiry back on the basis of guiding clues 
which are predelineated by the historical situation, by the concrete possession 
of intersubjective experience and by occasional self-apprehension, such that 
anything come upon hie et nunc as constituted includes the transcendental 
accomplishments. On the other hand, however, the transcendental ego can be 
grasped by means of habitualities, "for a standing and abiding I could not be 
constituted if a standing and abiding flow of mental acts were not constituted; 
therefore, if the originarily constituted unities formed between mental acts 
[Erlebniseinheiten] could not be taken up again, capable of a new emergence 
in recollection. "29 
Hexiological research is, thus, simply transcendental-phenomenological 
research. For in no case is it a matter of a description and characterization of 
the different empirical forms of the I. The so-called, "psychic," "personal" and 
"characterized" I are certainly each transcendent to consciousness insofar as 
each is a constituted sense. However, the ego in the formal ego cogito 
cogitatum designates something else. Here the I is meant as the "substrate of 
79 
habitualities," the I "in full concretion." It is the ego which is formed on the 
occasion of intentional foundings of sense in a particular form of immanent 
transcendence - precisely the form of the phansiological genesis of habitus. 
Absolute, super-temporal transcendental subjectity, which first makes 
possible historical unities formed between mental acts and non-historical 
unities of sense, is prior to this ego just as it is prior to every cogitatum. 
Transcendental sUbjectity is the "nunc stans" of the cogitationes as such. On 
this basis the distinterested, universal, phenomenological observer proves to 
be the sUbjectity which is generated in evidences of all types, the basis upon 
which it is first possible to speak of "transcendence," "transcendentality," 
"immanence," "history," etc. 
Acts of constitutive sense-formation are, then, accomplishments of 
sUbjectity which culminate in intentions that are polarized on the objective 
side. The act's noema, which is constituted as a unity of significance (that is 
essentially accessible intersubjectively), forms the point of departure for the 
transcendental-phenomenological intentional analysis. However, the 
bringing about of genetically formed unities culminates further in intentions 
as projecting intentions in that they, in going-into-action, produce what 
appears in retrospective, mundane reflection to belong to their concepts and 
in that they signify what they project upon their being executed and, hence, are 
"occurrences." Consequently, the universal founding of unity should be the 
watchword for sUbjectity. The founding of unity is no less present in 
habitualities than it is in the givenness of objects. It comes to light equally in 
phansis and phainomenon. 
Two things, then, come into view. On the one hand, what comes into view is 
what is constituted on the ground of intentional accomplishments and what 
becomes in particular the object of regional-eidetic research or natural or 
humanistic research; therefore, the mundanely constituted and 
intersubjectively referable "appearance." On the other hand, what forms the 
historical unities in its going-into-action also comes into view; therefore, the 
projections as such along with the habitualities dependent upon them, 
whereby the phenomenality of the phenomenon and the occurrence-ness of 
the occurrence or mind is manifested as that which is genuinely historical. The 
cogito, accordingly, not only has its cogitatum but also stands in an egological 
relation (irrespective of the object-intentional relatedness). That is, "because 
each cogito requires a cogitatum and this cogito stands, in the execution of 
this act, in relation to the pure I, we find a noteworthy polarity in each act: The 
I-pole on one side, the object as the opposite pole on the other. Each is an 
identity; however, the identity in each case has a radically different origin. "30 
If the ego cogito is now the point of departure, or if this ego cogito is the 
"ultimate basis for judgment"3! from which everything that appears must be 
investigated, then the ego itself is no exception, in that it is not an empty I-pole 
as a centered ego and as an ego that emerges with habitualities.32 In a word. 
80 
the genesis of habitualities once again refers back from the ego formed in its 
own, historical development to the genuine arche or to pure sUbjectity in its 
functioning. 
This shows that the "specific investigations related to the appearing and its 
moments," which H usserl assigned to phansiology,33 must stand in a close 
connection with egology and hexiology. It is, thus, the concrete, monadic ego, 
determined by the flux of cogitationes as such, which shows itself to be the 
"substrate of habitualities." This subjectity presents itself in the cogitationes 
as that which temporalizes and unifies. It projects nunc stan~ what can be 
conceived retrospectively as transcendental and mundane constitution. To 
speak of projection, however, is permitted only at the point, following the 
performance of the phenomenological reduction, where originarily presenting 
intentions, corresponding respectively to noemata, prove to be the 
accomplishments of an ego that is itself not Objectively constituted and not 
genetically habitualized. 
IV 
The arche is found in pure sUbjectity and "arche-ology" aims at the origin 
which establishes itself by projective accomplishments. Two things are 
expressed by this. When it is a question of logos, one certainly finds it to begin 
with as the unifying logos in the super-temporal unities of significance and in 
the habitual unities formed between mental acts. The unity in the latter case "is 
not a mere abstractum but, rather, a concrete unity of life. "34 For the question 
there is obviously not about the "identical content of the conviction in every 
instance as an ideal unity but, rather, about the content as identical for the 
SUbject, the content as its own. The subject acquires the conviction in earlier 
acts, but it does not pass away with the acts. Rather, the conviction belongs to 
the enduring subject as something that endures and abides with it. The 
conviction remains the same if the evidences are the same. "35 
However, even if this distinction between the unity of an object and the 
unity of the I must be conceded from the first. this does not mean that the 
logos governing the unities is now the arche. The beginning lies in the cogitatio 
as the sourcepoint for phansis and phainomenon. What we have termed 
sUbjectity is not, as is the case with something objective of any type, bound by 
further implications of sense which are to be traced back within a determinate 
horizon. Moreover, sUbjectity is not the concrete, monadic ego with its 
habitualities even if it is true that sUbjectity also reveals itself at each 
constituted temporal position correlative to what is constituted to be what 
temporalizes history in the auto-genesis of constituting consciousness. 
The independence of transcendental subjectity from the pregiven products 
of constitution, which distinguishes it in its accomplishing. is an independence 
81 
in the sense of underivability and absoluteness. In that case, then, what 
actually presents itself originarily from itself and originally legitimates itself is 
transcendental sUbjectity in its evidences that do not depend upon anything 
mundane. What can be valid as something given comes about by means of 
evidences: only what is projected appears as a something given. Evidence is the 
appearance-form of the original institution of sense and significance. The 
original accomplishment, phansis, however, must then be the historical 
phenomenon par excellence. 
To begin with, then, historical occurring is to be understood more 
ontologically than ontically. The correlative connection between conscious 
life on the one hand and, respectively, the habitualities of the ego and the 
sense-structures of the noema on the other justifies the thesis of consciousness' 
presenting something itself[Selbstgebung des Bewusstseins]; that is, the thesis 
of lived through and intuitive evidence in which "transcendental experience" 
is given its due. 36 When something takes place as an occurrence, there is 
history. The genuine, historical occurrences must be the evidences which 
project pregivennesses and not ones founded upon pregivennesses. For what 
shows itself from itself is evident, and since evidences are the accomplishments 
of the cogitatio in the broadest sense, the characteristics ofunderivability and 
absoluteness in the sense of projective going-into-action and, hence, the 
characteristic of occurring in the genuine sense befit only the cogitative 
(therefore, "thinking"). 
In this case, then, the execution of the cogitative functions projects and 
accomplishes what is then "thinking" for reflective consideration. Therefore, 
thinking as such becomes an occurrence unconditioned by what it intends at 
any given time and by what it at the same time habitualizes in the intention. 
The cogitationes, as constituting and habitualizing cogitationes, are ones that 
make something possible. The unity-founding function of the cogitationes 
manifests itself in their egological and noematic poles. Thus, the function 
appears in one respect as the temporalizing living through of these 
cogitationes and in the other as the evident having of super-temporal 
moments of sense and significance. 
Presenting something itself is valid only for cogitationes which imply, on 
the one hand, egological commitment and, on the other, the evidence of 
phenomenal Objectivities. Thus, transcendental subjectity is "the ratio in the 
constant movement of self-elucidation. "37 In its functioning, transcendental 
subjectity makes possible what should be, not what is. The originarily 
presenting accomplishment, thus, does not consist exclusively in the 
Objectifying ego cogito cogitatum but, in addition, in the so-called 
"existential understanding," which is an ego]ogicalhabitual understanding in 
that functioning sUbjectity grounds both the understanding of the thing and 
knowledge of the mineness [Jemeinigkeit] of the understanding by means of 
the corresponding mental acts which show the thing itself. Its relation to the 
82 
phainomenon as constituted appearance can only temporarily conceal the 
phenomenon as appearance in its appearing; therefore, can only temporarily 
conceal phansis. 
This phansis, which grounds temporality, is sedimented in the ego with its 
hexeis. For, 
whatever occurs in my ego and. eideticly, in any ego whatever in the way of intentional 
processes, constituted unities and habitualities of the I has its temporality and 
participates, in this respect. in the system offorms of universal temporality with which 
every imaginable ego is constituted for itselfY 
Transcendental sUbjectity is distinguished by the "nunc stam," therefore. by 
the respective going-into-action of functioning, constituting and 
habitualizing accomplishments. Its projection does not manifest what already 
"is" in anyone form but, rather, makes what should be a "problem." As a 
result, the truth of transcendental subjectity cannot be the "Objective truth" of 
something that is mundanely evident. It must be understood, rather, as 
being-in-the-truth, which is established in its occurring, in its coming 
forward. 
A phenomenology oriented only by the objectively constituted unities of 
sense and significance could never completely legitimate the "things 
themselves." For objective sense-wholes do not present themselves precisely 
as what they are, viz .. as.constituted phenomena. This means nothing other 
than the following: Their being a phenomenon is not accessible to 
noematically interested intentional analysis, because phenomenality as such is 
not a pregivenness that can be disclosed by means of guiding clues from 
implications of sense, as can other noematic moments. Phenomenality is not 
something present at hand and can, therefore, only appear in the occurrence 
of phenomenalizing mind. As a result, the investigation is referred back to 
transcendental subjectity, which "grounds" this occurrence. 
The manifestation of cogitative accomplishments as such temporalizes the 
historical unities. However, the particular way in which these 
accomplishments are structured conditions the type of phenomena which 
present themselves as super-temporal unities of significance. Phansiology and 
phenomenology respectively, then, are concerned with historically formed 
and non-historical validations. The execution of cogitative accomplishments 
as such grounds the egological habitualities which are, consequently, the 
sedimentation of pure phansis. The intentionality of the cogitationes, 
nevertheless, leads to the phainomena by means of transcendence in 
immanence. As a result, the apparition of mind is responsible for two things. 
In this context. however, "apparition" means making its appearance within 
a consciousness that is temporalized by this appearing and engaging itself on 
behalf of a pregivenness constituted in an intuitive, intentional evidence as 
something manifested that should be not engaging itself on behalf of an 
83 
already constituted pregivenness. Also, "if each cogito, along with all of its 
component parts, arises and passes away in the flux of mental acts,"39 then 
pure (transcendental) sUbjectity does not arise and pass away. Even if one 
could apprehend its arising and passing away originally, this would mean 
corroborating transcendental sUbjectity itself as functioning subjectity. The 
arche lies in the cogitationes. The same is stated when one says, "Acts in the 
specific sense of cogito occur in the flow of consciousness. "40 Transcendental 
subjectity, however, establishes itself both egologically and 
phenomenologically. 
v 
The cogitatio which stands at the beginning in the formula ego cogi/o 
cogitatum accomplishes two things: It enables both the ego and the 
phainomenon to appear. Accordingly, it appears that "constitution" is 
presented in a very broad sense in connection with the grounding functions of 
the cogitatio. For while it is true that each act is a consciousness of something, 
it is equally true that we are conscious of the act as well. Expressed differently, 
this means that the intentional process, without itself being "meant," is lived 
through (or immanently perceived).41 
The term "being lived through" (or "being immanently perceived') signifies 
nothing other than the fact that no new, second act of Objectifying turning 
towards is executed in relation to the original act. 42 If this immediate living 
through is not a new, intentional act, then what can be given through this 
living through is without doubt not something objective in the sense of 
something intentionally constituted. Nevertheless, it is obviously not nothing. 
From this it follows that while the cogitative accomplishment certainly 
becomes known at first by means of what is objectively constituted, the 
accomplishment is not exhausted by this knowledge. 
The genesis of inner consciousness, which takes place on the occasion of the 
execution of sense-bestowing acts (acts that "mean" something), is a second 
product of this functioning accomplishment. No infinite regress results in the 
sense that object-intentional acts would again be perceived by object-
intentional acts. Instead of an intentional turning towards, a being aware of 
that is not one having the characteristic of an act appears. 
It follows from the double function ofthe cogitatio just described, however, 
that the cogitatio is not only "sense-bestowing" in the sense of the constitution 
of something objective but, also, that it is itself subjectively lived through, 
independent of all particular mediations of significance. Genetic aspects 
emerge on the occasion of the execution of intentional acts, aspects which are 
not noematic ones. The acts present themselves as having a duration. as 
flowing and centered acts. Because of the particular way it is formed, their 
84 
pole of centering, the ego, is not a noema, standing alongside other noemata. 
Transcendental sUbjectity "actually lives" in the acts.43 As a result, the acts as 
mental processes have two aspects- "the purely subjective aspect of the mental 
process and the remaining, as it were I-modified content of the mental 
process"44 - found in them at once such that a "subjectively oriented and an 
Objectively oriented aspect are to be distinguished"45 in these mental 
processes. Transcendental sUbjectity is found, if at all, only in its relations, 
which can be of such genetic and constitutive types. Transcendental subjectity 
itself, as that which "discharges" everthing, has no apprehensible content and, 
thus, lives completely in its genetic and constitutive relations. 
The genetic function becomes clear when the cogitationes impose 
themselves upon the inner consciousness of time as the unity of a f10w of 
consciousness, independent of the transcendent, noematic pole they intend in 
their f1owing. The cogitationes do not only "bestow" sense and significance. 
They also present themselves as "something of which we are conscious" when 
they are understood by the metaphor of a "f1ux." Whenever the unity of a 
constituting consciousness becomes known, this unity is a genetically formed 
unity and not an "intended" unity. Without retentional formations, therefore, 
there is no ego as the I-pole of the lived, mental acts. Without a genetically 
formed ego, there is no f10wing consciousness apprehensible as a f1ux.41> Just 
as multiplicities are synthetically united in consciousness, mUltiplicities which 
are then sense-wholes, the moments of being conscious of converge in the 
synthetic unity of the conscious ego. 
The cogitatio cannot, accordingly, be considered simply under the aspect of 
being an "act." Without doubt, no object-intentional acts are executed in 
connection with the centering of consciousness and, therefore, in connection 
with either the formation of an ego or the genesis of habitualities, despite the 
fact that this formation takes place on the occasion of the execution of such 
intentional accomplishments. The Cartesian-H usserlian schema of a 
thorough-going, object-intentional structure of consciousness undergoes a 
correction here. 47 
The cogitatio is incompletely interpreted in its 
accomplishment when it is understood only as a sense-constituting act. 
Significance related to things and the description of such significance in 
language are always found where the cogitatio functions as an object-
intentional act. However. the ego is simply not such an intersubjectively 
referable "thing," from which it follows that the cogitatio, merely by its 
occurring, is both conscious of something and conscious of itself. Thus, the 
relation which presents itself in the f1ux of consciousness is bivalent: On the 
one hand, the cogitatio, as an act, is intentionally directed to the phainomenon 
as its intenta; on the other hand, the cogitatio is, in its phansis, the origin for 
ego logical geneses in that it also brings about, in addition to the logical 
founding of unity, tNe living-historical ("temporalizing") synthesization. 
If the ego cogito is to be the point of departure as such or the "ultimate basis 
85 
for judgment"48 from which everything else must be investigated, then the ego 
itself is no exception, since it will not be an empty I-pole as the ego which is 
centered and which emerges with habitualities. In a word, transcendental 
sUbjectity in no way coincides with the I-pole of historically temporalized 
mental acts.49 From this it follows that the constituted noemata meant in the 
flux of consciousness are not the only poles transcendent to the cogitationes. 
The "unity of inner consciousness" or the I-pole of the temporal mental acts is 
also such a transcendent pole. 50 Admittedly, this holds only when the 
immediately lived through, genetically formed habitualities as well as the 
"merely intentional correlates" of homogeneously appertaining mental acts 
are "contained within" the flux of cogitationes.51 
The phenomenological schematism of legitimation and grounding means 
that a flowing life of consciousness cannot be simply asserted to be the case, 
but that the life of consciousness is itself to provide proof of its being a flowing 
life of consciousness by means of mental acts that originally present it as being 
such. However, in that the life of consciousness is experienced as a nexus, it 
becomes apparent that consciousness cannot simply be "there" but that an 
ego, an "I, who subjectively lives this and that, who lives through this and that 
cogito as the same 1"52 emerges within the life of consciousness. 
This particular form of the founding of unity appears in the genesis of 
habitus. That each objective sense correlative to the cogitationes is constituted 
by an act does not exclude the fact that genetic unities are formed in the flow of 
intentional acts. The form of legitimation pertaining to these genetic unities is 
the immediate living through. Therefore, the I of the mental acts, which 
"embraces the particular multiplicities of cogitationes collectively in its own 
manner; namely, as belonging to the identical 1,"53 is dependent upon 
functioning transcendental sUbjectity. 
Admittedly, everything that has sense and significance is constituted in 
cogitationes. At the same time, however, the flux of mental life and the pure 
occurrence as such leave behind their marks. A genetic-historical synthesis of 
identification runs parallel to the founding of unity as the latter appears 
correlative to object-intentional acts. Transcendental sUbjectity can now be 
grasped as functioning exclusively in its accomplishments without coinciding 
with what is accomplished. 
It has been said justifiably that it is necessary to leave out of consideration 
certain concepts of sUbjectivity.54 In the case of transcendental sUbjectity, the 
inquiry does not concern, 
1. spirit or the psyche as that which makes man a man, the subject a subject, 
2. the empirical or personal I that one normally calls the subject, 
3. the subjective as being that is for the subject, the possession of the I. 
Everything that stands over against the 1 as a pregivenness of the activity of the 
I is formally the subjective possession of the I. As Husserl says, "They are 
86 
subjective." Not, however, as acts or states ofthe I, but as that possessed by the 
I ... , 
4. the subjective as the being of the subject, or I-ness itself, which is simply the 
"unity constituted as the flow of consciousness. "55 
VI 
At least two transcendencies, then, can be attributed to transcendental 
sUbjectity when the cogitationes are polarized on one hand with respect to the 
act-constituted noemata and on the other with respect to the genetically 
formed habitus. However, the nature of the latter transcendence is still 
thoroughly problematic. For certainly "the flux of consciousness is also 
constituted in consciousness as a unity."56 In that case, however, the 
functioning form of just this consciousness as transcendental sUbjectity is then 
to be distinguished from the "founding of the unity of the flux of 
consciousness as it appears to itself. "57 For the so-called "inner perception" 
(therefore, the "I think" which can accompany all cogitationes), "as opposed 
to all of the Objects constituted in it, can never be objectified in the sense that 
then something like a constituted, immanent unity would emerge; that is, this 
consciousness is not a temporal Object. "58 
While this consciousness is not a temporal Object, it does appear to be 
transcendent in a particular form nevertheless. To begin with, however, 
transcendence means something else. Cogitationes, as object-intentional acts, 
constitute the whole of the world. They ground at the same time the habitus of 
a unity formed between mental acts belonging to the I who is "determined by 
this abiding habitus as a persisting I. "59 If, however, the formation of habitus 
does not originate from "Objectifying" accomplishments, accomplishments 
that "mean" something, then no acts of cognition are in question. Rather, the 
habitus are established by the mental processes of being aware of and living 
through which are concomitant with acts of cognition. 
Since the habitualities are qualified as abiding nevertheless, they must 
certainly designate something that is transcendent to the object-intentional 
flux of consciousness. Where the I as I-pole of mental acts and of the 
habitualities of the I are discussed, there emerges something different than the 
something meant in intentional acts; and something which in fact does not 
pass away with the cogitationes which occasion the something meant. Thus, 
the exception, that the genetic achievement of this type is not to be understood 
as something constituted as an object and as such transcendent to 
consciousness is justified. 
In connection with the genesis of the I-pole of mental acts, the acts 
which "mean" something, which tend towards the noematic unities of sense, 
are nbt transcended in the same sense that they are transcended by the objects 
87 
they intend. Rather, they are transcended with regard to their having-be en-
lived-through, whereby this living through results in abiding sedimentations 
in the temporalized ego with its patent and latent possessions (therefore, 
with its habitus and habitualities). When we originally discussed "transcendence 
in immanence," what was expressed was that the in ten tum with its significance 
remains transcendent to the mere, presenting act in accordance with the 
correlative connection between noesis and noema. 60 Accordingly, the sense-
pole, as transcendent to the act, stands over against the object-intentional 
mental act. In contrast to this, object-imentionality is transcended with regard 
to the non-objective in connection with the genesis ofthe I -pole of mental acts 
such that, on one hand, a surpassing of the act as a moment of the fluxing life 
of consciousness itself and, on the other, a surpassing of the act as an object-
intentional act takes place. 
Therefore, the atemporal unity of significance, on the one hand, and the 
temporalized unity of consciousness, on the other, both of which refer back to 
original synthetic accomplishments, become transparent. 61 Transcendental 
subjectity reveals itself to be the formal structure of this flux of cogitationes, 
cogitationes which are themselves new with respect to "content" and new with 
respect to habitual consequences. 62 
This transcendental sUbjectity, then. is neither an objective unity that is 
composed in some way nor an I-pole of mental acts (together with habitus and 
habitualities). Precisely the term "subjectity" shows that what is in question is 
function as form. Transcendental sUbjectity abides, even though the mental 
acts flow: to that extent, it transcends the acts. 
H usserl raises the question directly which imposes itself upon us here: 
"Does not the flux also have something that abides in a certain manner, even 
though no part of the flux can change into a non-flux?" And the answer is, 
What abides above all is the formal structure of the flux, the form of the flux. That is, 
the flowing is not simply a random flowing; rather, each phase has one and the same 
form. The constant form is always newly filled with "content. "However, the content is 
not something external which is brought into the form. Rather, it is determined by the 
form of regularity; only such that this regularity does not alone determine the 
concretum. The form consists in this, that a now is constituted by an impression and 
that to the impression is joined both a tail of retentions and a horizon of protentions. 
The abiding form, however, enables there to be consciousness of constant change, 
which is a primal fact: consciousness of the change of the impression into retention 
while a new impression is always there; or, with regard to the "what" of the impression, 
consciousness of the change of this "what" while the just-now, which we are still 
conscious of as "now," is modified and obtains the character of "just-having-been. "63 
Transcendental sUbjectity functions as time-constituting consciousness in 
such a way that, because of the intentional structure of consciousness, it 
cannot actually be at all without something to intend. The form of the flux of 
consciousness becomes transparent, naturally, only when consciousness 
appears. However, consciousness occurs because, 
88 
two, inseparably integrated intentionalities that, like two sides of one and the same 
thing, require one another are interwoven with one another in the single flux of 
consciousness. By virtue of one, immanent time is constituted. This is an Objective 
time, a true time, in which there is duration and alteration of that which endures. In the 
other, the quasi-temporal ordering of the phases of the flux is constituted. This 
ordering always and necessarily has the flowing "now" point, the phase of actuality, 
and the series of preactual and postactual (the not-yet-actual) phases. This 
prephenomenal, preimmanent temporality is constituted intentionally as the form of 
time-constituting consciousness and 
is 
constituted within time-constituting 
consciousness itself. The flux of immanent, time-constituting consciousness not only 
is, but the flux is so remarkably and yet understandably composed that an appearance 
of the flux to itself necessarily subsists in it and, for that reason, the flux must 
necessarily be graspable in the flowing. The appearance of the flux to itself does not 
require a second flux; rather, it is constituted within itself as a phenomenon. The 
constituting and the constituted coincide, though naturally they do not coincide in 
every respect. 64 
Intentional analysis takes into account the objects constituted in "Objective 
time." The genesis of habitus, on the other hand, is evidence not only for the 
fact that the "flux of immanent, time-constituting consciousness" is but, in 
addition, for the fact that it has appeared to itself. Thus the problem of a 
"universal," transcendental-phenomenological idealism consists in clarifying 
how the constituting and the constituted coincide and yet do not coincide. 
VII 
Transcendental phenomenology is concerned with the constitution of the 
givenness of Objects in accordance with consciousness. Accordingly, the 
arc he is not sought in the transcendencies correlative to consciousness but in 
the transcendental form of this consciousness. The transcendental is the 
complete opposite of things and objects, since the conceptual-categorial 
structure of the latter is not commensurate with the transcendental. Thus, the 
transcendental is not to be understood as a "something," for its sense is super-
categorial: It is not a thing, not an objective unity but sUbjectity. SUbjectity 
completely surpasses the domain of what exists and has sense. It presents itself in its 
surpassing as transcendentia in actu. However, the transcendental form of the 
constituting and genetic function appears in actu. Transcendentality belongs 
to metaphysica generalis, which here refers not to ens qua ens but to sUbjectity 
as that which makes possible. Metaphysica specialis, then, can account for 
everything that is something made possible - is formed - correlative to the 
presenting accomplishments without the two coinciding. 
In accordance with the double polarization of the cogitationes with respect 
to the sense-pole and the I-pole, we must speak here of transcendence and 
para-transcendence. 65 It is true transcendence when the unities of sense and 
significance, in their categorial formation as "essences," have intentional 
89 
existence beyond the cogitative executions, though the unities are connected 
with the cogitationes as their intenta. Para-transcendence appears to be 
presented when the "I of the mental acts"with its habitualities has appeared to 
itself in the flux of cogitationes and yet is not this flux. 
However, it is also not a transcendent "essence." The identical poles of the 
mental acts are distinct from the constituted unities of sense and significance, 
without themselves being something objective. For "the ego itself exists for 
itself in continuous evidence; therefore, it is an ego continuously constituted in 
itself as existing. "66 The ego "grasps itself not merely as a flowing life but also 
as an I, the 1 who subjectively lives this and that, who lives through this and 
that cogito as the same I. "67 The fact of transcendental genesis results in new 
abiding characteristics [Eigenheiten] because the multiplicities of cogitationes 
are synthesized as the cogitationes of the identical I. "According to a law of 
transcendental genesis," this central 1 acquires "a new abiding characteristic 
with each act emanating from the 1 which has a new objective sense. "68 
With this abiding characteristic as it is manifested in the 1 as the substrate of 
habitualities, the time-constituting flux, as absolute sUbjectity, is transcended, 
even though it is indeed a transcendence of a peculiar sort. For, 
the persisting, the temporal enduring of such determinations of the I and the peculiar 
change the I undergoes in respect to them is obviously not a continuous filling of 
immanent time with mental acts - just as the abiding I itself, as the pole of abiding 
I-determinations, is not an act or a continuity of acts, even though it is essentially related 
back to the flow of acts by such habitual determinations.69 
Absolute sUbjectity cannot appear without Objects. Nevertheless, a sort 
of "not-coming-forth" and, hence, a "para-transcendence" is certainly 
present in its appearance to itselPO Accordingly, the following holds: 
When a primal datum, a new phase, emerges, the preceding one is not lost but is 
"maintained in grasp" (i.e., "retained") and, thanks to this retention, a looking back to 
what has run off is possible. Retention is not itself a looking back that makes the phase 
which has run off an Object. Because I have the phase which has run off in my grasp, I 
live through the present phase, take the phase which has run off "in addition to" the 
present phase - thanks to retention - and am directed towards the phase which is 
coming (by protention).71 
Everything here depends upon the "being-aware-of," upon the "living 
through." For by this the "not-corning-forth" indicated earlier becomes clear. 
Egological habitus are formed only because consciousness is necessarily 
consciousness in all of its phases. 72 The constituting and what is constituted 
can coincide in a unique way only insofar as consciousness is not only 
consciousness of something but is at once that of which we are conscious as 
well. That is, when retentions of the sort just mentioned occur such that poles 
of centering arise on the occasion of cogitative executions in an immediate, 
genetic formation, the result is not a transcendence in the direction of the 
90 
noematic intenta which are the correlates of acts. Rather, a para-
transcendence is actualized in the occasional appearance of the retentional 
centers themselves. 
The I with its habitualities, which originates in intentional 
accomplishments, is not a unity of an object, thing, sense or significance. 
Nevertheless, the I has come about genetically by virtue of a synthesis that 
places an egological pole alongside the noematic pole of the cogitationes. On 
the ground of such a synthesis, there can then be an I with a style that endures 
changes, an I with a "thorough-going unity of identity" and with a "personal 
character. "73 All of this depends precisely upon the hic et nunc of the 
cogitationes, without involving aspects transcendent in the objective sense. 
On the other hand, the flux does not remain simply a flux of cogitationes: The 
flux becomes evident as a "continuity of adumbrations" by means of the living 
through and is, hence, para-transcendent. 
VIII 
If phenomenology's domain of research is in fact transcendentally purified 
consciollsness, then this research must be concerned with the transcendencies 
and para-transcendencies dependent upon the transcendental structure of 
consciousness. As a result transcendentally purified consciousness is nothing 
other than the everyday consciousness for which both the I and world are, 
with the difference that "world" and "I" are not posited as existent for this 
purified consciousness. The so-called natural thesis of being itself also belongs 
to an immanent consciousness and, hence, becomes a transcendental moment 
of sense. A "transcendentally purified consciousness" can only originate from 
functioning cogitationes, for which there is no "pregiven" world-subject or 
world-Object. The "I" and "world" are first constituted correlative to one 
another such that a different I possesses a different surrounding world and a 
different consciousness. 74 
The transcendent and para-transcendent formations "world" and "monadic 
ego" are formed in nexuses of sense and habitus that are products of 
cogitationes which constantly transcend themselves. As a result, the 
"transcendent" and "para-transcendent" can be distinguished on the model of 
the distinction between things and the psychic. Things are essentially 
distinguished by the fact that they can be given by "adumbrations, "while such 
adumbration, in view of the immediacy of being-a ware-of, is not the case for 
the psychic. The adumbrations form multiplicity of appearances such that the 
thing which shows itself is given to consciousness without, however, 
coinciding with consciousness. I t is precisely the essential transcendence of the 
essence of the thing, as it is clarified by the noetic-noematic correlation, which 
makes the reduction of things, objects and matters of fact to mental acts 
impossible. 75 
91 
Where there is a transcendence in immanence, it cannot be said that the 
"essence," as the identical, specific quid, vanishes completely behind the 
appearance-qualia of the adumbrations. What the being of the respective 
essence is belongs simply to the moments of sense which specifically 
distinguish it and, hence, to what is constituted transcendentally. The 
cogitationes which constitute transcendentally never "are" in this way because 
they function by bestowing sense. However, the so-called "psychic" together 
with the whole multiplicity of I-forms (with the exception of the 
phenomenological, universal observer, who remains outside of all 
phenomenological questions) is not the cogitatio either. Thus, the "psychic" 
together with the pure I formed in "immanent transcendence" as the empty 
point of identity, with the I in full concretion, with the I as the substrate of 
habitualities or with the concrete ego as the primal monad, etc. is not the 
cogitatio. Rather, the psychic is sedimented as something that abides (as 
something "para-transcendenC) in its continual process of becoming. 
IX 
What is wholly other lies in transcendentality and not in what is categorially 
formed in this or that way. Accordingly, it surpasses the transcendent and the 
para-transcendent in the same sense that what grounds surpasses the 
grounded. Because phenomenology is concerned with that which grounds, 
with that on the ground of which givennesses first become graspable and 
conceivable, phenomenology becomes "idealism." For, 
idealism, in all of its forms, attempts to lay hold of subjectivity as subjectivity and to 
account for the fact that the world is never given to subjects and to communities of 
subjects as anything other than the world with its respective content of experience valid 
subjective-relatively. This world is one that receives ever new transformations of sense 
in and through subjectivity. Even the apodictically persisting conviction of one and the 
same world, presenting itself subjectively in changing manners, is a conviction that is 
motivated purely within subjectivity, a conviction whose sense - the world itself, the 
actually existing world - never surpasses the subjectivity which brings it about. 76 
On this basis, transcendental-phenomenological idealism regards itself to be 
an actualism. 
In this context, it need not be indicated that actualism cannot mean that all 
being exists in activity and that it would require no support. Where "being" 
itself emerges as a moment of sense of accomplishments which make 
. understanding possible, being cannot exist in activity. Accordingly, 
phenomenological actualism does not signify the opposite of the so-called 
philosophy of substance in the sense that the pure nux of becoming would be 
posited in place of a "supporter" of activities. For being and becoming, 
activity and rest, are all, jointly and severally, moments of sense that 
presuppose sense-bestowing functions and first come to consciousness by 
92 
means of these functions. Transcendental subjectity, which cannot be 
anticipated, is the arche itself in that it appears in cogitationes and makes 
ontological as well as ontic experience possible,77 
Nevertheless, it does not follow from the fact that sUbjectity is a functioning 
subjectity that "operational" groundings are as equally possible as 
"phenomenological" groundings. 78 When one speaks of an operational 
forming of the world, then it is understood that epistemology's traditional 
subject-Object division is overcome, because actual and imagined things are 
to be nothing other than the poiemata of actual or imagined actions. The 
operationalistic reductione is to bring about the disregarding of every 
"opinion" which belongs exclusively to the individual I as something 
uncertain. What is to remain existing is only that which has validity 
independent of the I. Thus, a reinterpretation of the Cartesian-H usserlian 
beginning from doubt. according to which the I as mine remains 
certain and indubitable, is required such that precisely this I, as what is 
uncertain and dubitable, is now to rank behind the required validities which 
are independent of the I. 
The operationalistic epoche, then, concerns procedures of consciousness, 
whereby the domain of actions and operations is to remain after the epoche as 
what is indubitable. The phenomenological abstention from judgment 
concerning the real validity of actuality is opposed by the epoche concerning 
all reflective procedures of consciousness. What becomes questionahle is not 
what can become an "object" but what pertains only to me. The departure 
from actions would correspond to the passage back to the domain of 
cogitationes such that the counter-schema of poesis and poiema, ofjacit and 
jactum, of construction and certainty opposes the phenomenological schema 
of noesis and noema, of cogito and cogitatum, of intuition and evidence. 
From the start. then, the departure from apparently problem less 
transcendental intersubjectivity replaces the departure from transcendental 
sUbjectivity. At the same time, then, the residuum remaining after the 
phenomenological reduction is not understood as functioning sUbjectity but, 
rather, as a reservoir of "fundamental, non-operational concepts" and 
"directives for action"; therefore, as the fundamental, phenomenological 
stock for operational achievements. 79 
I t is obvious that this operational formulation does not extend as far as does 
the phenomenological formulation. For when it is said that "because the I, as 
conscious of itself, is bracketed, only that accepted and valid for others, also 
for myself as other, remains ... "80 then "something" is always still valid, 
something remains, therefore, a phenomenon. The appeal to pure operations 
and actions as such is always insufficient when the question concerns the 
formation of an order of being about which something can be determined and 
statements can be made. 81 The order of poiemata (the made) is an order only 
for a consciousness that experiences the moments of sense. The moments of 
93 
sense and significance which determine the order, moments which have 
become a world through operations and actions, are constituted only by 
conscious processes. 
Where it is a question of cognizing and knowing, one cannot go back behind 
the sense-bestowing cogitationes, cogitationes for which even operations and 
actions are "phenomena." Only the cogitatio can grasp both itself and the 
poiemata, for it is related through transcendence and para-transcendence to 
both "what exists" and the appearing consciousness. Therefore, the 
cogitationes are actually something ultimate: They present both the 
transcendent "existent" and the para-transcendent consciousness which lives 
through, consciousness as the point of centering and the executor of the 
cogitationes, whereby both aspects of "immanent .transcendence" are 
encompassed. A corresponding passage back (encompassing both poiemata 
and noemata) to what grounds itself that begins from operations is excluded. 
F or "thinking can pass from the thinking of being to the thinking of thinking. 
Being cannot ... "82 And the operations cannot be grasped as operations if they 
are not at bottom simply consciousness. The function cogitationes qua 
cogitationes is underivable because we first raise ourselves above the in-itself 
connection of operations by cogitationes. This is so because the impetus to 
"significance," to "sense" and to the intentional moments of the retentions-
having ego first takes place in cogitationes alone, correlative to the 
immanence of occurrence. By this, it first becomes possible to speak of 
"operations" and their accomplishments as such. 83 Therefore, 
transcendental-phenomenological, universal idealism and the problematic of 
constitution are connected.84 
x 
In connection with the transcendental considerations which aim at grasping 
and elucidating an order of being as an order, the reduction to the synthetic 
accomplishments of the order is straight-forward in that the thing which is to 
be set within the order or is in the order is not afactum brutum but, rather, 
contains sense and significance. Cogitative functions are not to be 
disregarded, particularly since isolated (individual, "natural') knowledge is 
only one instance of cogitative constitution in general. Moreover, they cannot 
be bypassed if the grasping of "essences," whiCh, on the basis of the natural, 
naive understanding of the world, is generally understood in the sense of a 
"philosophical hypostatization" or of a "natural-scientific substruction," is to 
be clarified. 85 Just as it is true that the "natural," "normal," "everyday" and 
"naive" attitudes imply as attitudes the question concerning what makes them 
possible transcendentally, it is equally true that they, as attitudes connected in 
a certain way, do not allow the transcendental form to shine through in a 
94 
straightforward manner. Looking away from the original experience of the 
world in the reduced attitude enables the essential transcendental correlation 
between "world" and "consciousness of the world''86 to emerge for the first 
time. This correlation is "the absolute correlation between entities of every 
type and every sense, on one hand, and absolute subjectivity, as constituting 
sense and ontic validity in the broadest manner, on the other. ''87 At this point, 
the investigation of the variable cogitative achievements imposes itself upon 
us. 
I t is a question, then, of, 
the systematic unfolding of the universal a priori innate to the essence of 
transcendental subjectivity (and, consequently, to a transcendental intersubjectivity as 
well), or the systematic unfolding of the universal logos of all conceivable being. KS 
This logos must determine "arche-ology, ""phansiology" and "hexiology," for 
it is the form of sUbjectity. 
Functioning subjectity is a priori, and the question arises whether it also 
appears as intersubjectivity and what intersubjectivity is. The acquiring of a 
super-individual standpoint is always connected with transcendental 
philosophy because it is to be grounding in the broadest sense, for even the 
"individual," the "constituted" I, the concrete "monad" is already constituted. f 
In that case, what is at issue is the problematic of constitution, the problematic 
by which the transcendental-phenomenological reduction must enable the 
exact apprehension of the a priori subjectity, the systematic unfolding of 
which actually makes "all conceivable being" understandable as a 
phenomenally constituted formation. 
In the carrying out ofthefundamental, phenomenological intentions, then, 
the problematics of the reduction and constitution have a complementary 
relationship. When the question aims at making what exists and is given 
understandable as "appearance" (phainomenon and phansis) according to 
their sense, and when in doing so one departs from the intentionaL 
functioning accomplishments of subjectivity, then the understanding which is 
gained has a different structure than the knowledge acquired under the 
governance of the so-called "natural attitude," knowledge which departs from 
the definitive opposition between subject and Object. In the former case, 
knowledge of phenomena always means the grasping of phenomena with a 
mere claim to being. In that each and everything can "appear" in its abiding 
characteristic only as a pole of cogitative executions, the problematic of 
constitution reveals itself to be a universal problematic, not a merely limited 
one. 
To what is constituted in cogitative executions also belongs that which 
presents itself with the claim of Objective validity. However, the sense of 
"Objective validity" requires intersubjectivity. At the same time, the question 
is raised, how is it possible to overcome the de facto illusion of a 
transcendental solipsism? 
95 
Transcendental subjectity, which founds unity in the nuncstans,89 is not the 
transcendental ego of the phenomenological reduction, since this ego is 
characterized as the abiding I of all convictions.9o In phansiological and 
hexiological analysis, all founded unities are referred back to the cogitationes, 
the unities being poles of the cogitationes. Existent and non-existent, true and 
false, valuable and valueless, senseful and senseless belong to the noematic 
domain just as habitualities and cancelled habitualities, etc. belong to the 
egological domain.9 ) 
Whatever else may be ascertained about the phansiologically or 
phenomenologically founded unity, the cogitatum as a unity is always 
attributed to an ego as a unity. This ego cannot be the pure, transcendental 
ego, for the transcendental ego is not the pole of specific convictions but, 
rather, of all convictions. If questions concerning being and non-being, sense 
and nonsense are raised, then an ego--pole, as the pole of the convictions 
pertaining to them, is established correlative to the corresponding cogitata. If 
one now analyzes the particular cogitata "I am" and "I am not."92 it is obvious 
that the negatively or affirmatively corroborated ego does not coincide with 
the ego which is generated concomitantly on the occasion of this type of 
intentional execution. In a word, the I of all my actual cogitationes, as a 
constituted I, is not necessary. In contrast to this, one cannot abstra("1 from the 
transcendental I as the I-pole as such, who "is" when cogitationes "are." 
Hence, it follows: "only the cogitatio is given absolutely. "93 Everything that 
goes beyond the cogitatio is called "in itself'; it is a founded unity and can at 
most validly make a claim to being. This establishes the theme of universal 
idealism.94 
When one says that a "world" is given in accordance with consciousness, 
that does not mean that the world is in the ego. The world has this or that 
index of sense; e.g., even the characteristic of being "Objective." The term 
"intentionality of consciousness" expresses the alienness to the I (and, in this 
respect, "irreality") ofthe world which is given. Thus, the ego which governs in 
the functioning cogitationes proves to be transcendental, and each instance of 
something's being given is a transcending of the cogitationes. 
At this point, the transcendental-phenomenological paradox emerges. 
Namely, the transcendental ego (the I-pole), as something absolutely, 
indu bitably evident, is the universal a priori for the very reason tha t what itself 
transcends the cogitationes of this ego is constituted in the cogitationes which 
belong to the ego. Therefore, the intentionality of ego logical consciousness 
proves to be the ground for "transcendence in immanence. ''95 
With regard to the problem of transcendental idealism, it can be further 
stated that "natural being is not absolute being but, rather, being as tht> 
correlate of consciousness (cognition); this correlation means, however, that 
natural being is intentional being which necessarily refers back to the 
connections of the intentio, which is a thinking consciousness -
a 
96 
consciousness that, on its side, is absolute because it does not again refer back 
in this manner." And because it belongs to the immanent essence of such 
connections of consciousness "that the object is thought, posited, finally 
determined in a valid manner and known in these connections of 
consciousness, Objective being resolves into connections of consciousness 
which stand under eidetic laws. The thing considered scientifically is what it is. 
This is the same for epistemology and metaphysics." Phenomenology, 
however, "performs the reflection which is unique to it ... It shows that all 
Objectivities are 'appearances' in a unique sense, viz., unities of thought, 
unities of mUltiplicities which on their side (as consciousness) make up the 
absolute in which all Objectivities are constituted. "96 
However, it is now necessary to get to the root of these Objectivities as 
intersubjectively referable and apprehensible. This can be done by the 
following argument: 
I. 
There is a correlation between real being and actual (=effecting) 
subjectivity, for the proposition "there is the possibility of an object" is 
equivalent to the proposition "there is the possibility of valid knowledge 
of this object." Both possibilities include the possibility of experience by 
originarily presenting consciousness. 97 
Hence, 
it follows: "The 
hypothesis, the formulation 'this objectivity exists' implies, therefore, 
that an I must be positable who is related to this objectivity in a knowing 
cogito. "98 
2. 
It holds for the real world that the possible appearance of precisely this 
real world from a certain here and now is noematically related to 
possible experience in general. However, it follows that: "According to 
the given idea of our world of things, the possibility of experience ofthe 
world of things presupposes that the experiencer himself must have a 
body in this world insofar as he is in the experienced world ... ''99 As a 
result, it is shown that "a material world as a merely material world 
cannot be conceived; it can be conceived only as a psycho-physical 
world."100 
3. 
The proposition "the possibility of a material world requires the 
possibility of a being in the world who is capable of knowledge" signifies 
further that knowledge of an identical, material world by a so-called 
subject is "Objective" only if the world is valid not only for this subject 
but for all other, cognizing sUbjects. However, the identity between 
what is experienced by two subjects can only be asserted by either 
another, super-ordinated subject who overlooks the different 
accomplishments of subjectivity and the same world of experience or by 
a subject living with these world-experiencing subjects in a "relation of 
empathy." ]n that case, however, this means that all of these "subjects 
have an animate existence in the presupposed world of things. "101 
97 
Two problems are interlaced here. On the one hand, the problem is to 
guarantee that the world which is produced by cogitative executions is in fact a 
material, psycho-physical, experienceable world. On the other hand, it should 
be shown that this world is an "Objective" and, hence, an essentially 
intersubjectively referable world. Accordingly, the following two 
considerations must be made in order to clarify "universal idealism" within 
the framework of the problematic of constitution. 
If there is a material nature, then necessarily belonging to it as a correlate 
are subjects whose existence is not a merely logical possibility (an existence 
that need not be). When material nature is a phenomenon, the existence of 
cognizing, grasping subjects must be an actuality. Logically possible worlds 
require as a correlate logically possible subjects. If such a world is a 
phenomenon, the possibility must be a real possibility. Such a possibility is the 
case if the factors which establish a grasping are given: if they are given, the 
grasping itself, as constituting that phenomenalizes, is no longer merely 
(logically) possible but actual. The possibility of legitimate knowledge must be 
real. 102 The supposition of the possibility of knowledge of a material world 
includes the possibility of egos who experience the world. For experience of 
the world takes place in cogitative constitutions, and the constitution of a 
material world requires the appropriate cogitative presuppostions; i.e., 
constituting, "psycho-physical, ""animate, ""embodied" subjects who are able 
to experience. 
Each subject is a subject for the world belonging to him as a correlate. 
Consequently, the subject must possess the distinctive dispositions of 
experience and peculiarities of constitution which result in the intentional 
world belonging to him. Transcendental-phenomenological idealism 
becomes clear when one considers that each determinate world can be 
imagined only for the corresponding, actual subject with the "possible" 
dispositions of cognition and experience which pertain to the world; i.e., for 
subjects who belong to this world. I03 In a word, there must be a means of 
sensory-animate experience and grasping for a sensuous-materially 
interpreted world. 
That what is experienced as having the significance "Objective" cannot be a 
merely solipsisticly meant or presumed "Objective" is proven by the following 
argument. The phenomenal correlates of experience exhibit, in addition to 
the distinctive sense "Objective," phenomena of another sort, viz., other 
sUbjects. That the alter ego, however, is not something merely imagined and 
intentionally meant must be guaranteed for the constitutive theory of the 
experience of someone else by the transcendental guiding clue which lies in 
the particular noetic noematic manners of givenness of the alter ego. 104 
If a reduction of transcendental experience to the subjective sphere of 
ownness is carried out, then a first, "noematic" sphere appears that is, by 
means of a self-apperception, the sphere of psycho-physical man, Within this 
98 
sphere are the first actualities and potentialities of the flow of mental acts reduced 
to ownness. However, what the experiencing ego possesses is not exhausted by 
this. I n addition, the intentional object belongs to the ego. Transcendence in 
the sense of sensory objects joins para-transcendence in the sense of 
habitualities. 
However, that these objects are to be "Objective" and, hence. ones that can 
demand intersubjective validity can be claimed only if the existence of other 
subjects is in fact guaranteed. The phenomenological principle. to let what 
shows itself evidently have its say, leads to the acknowledgement and 
explication of the experience of someone else. In this case. the other. who is 
another subject and not a mere thing, is not simply presented [prasentiert] and 
intended in accordance with consciousness in the way that a thing, a physical 
body or an object are. Rather, he is experienced in analogizing appcrccption 
as something exceptional. The mediate (empathizing) appresentation of the 
alter ego stands apart from the immediate presentation [Priisentation] of 
objects. 105 
A peculiar kind of verification by mediate intentionality is involved in this 
case. While objects are presented in adumbrations on the ground of sensory 
data. other subjects are uno bstructedly appresented as the centers of their own 
constitutive accomplishments, as egos. 106 Much in one's own intentional life 
refers back to the constitutions of just these "others." Above all, however. it is 
clear that the senses of "Objective," "Objectivity" and "universal validity" can 
first be made apparent after the experience of the you has clarified what "is" 
only for me and what "is" also for another. 
for an ego, "other" in the specific sense can only be an alter ego. As the 
center of possible constitutions, the alter ego is distinguished fundamentally 
from the mere cogitatum and cannot be understood on the basis of objects. 
The other is not found as a particular object among other, noematic unities. 
Rather, I have Objective objects because I possess, together with the alter ego. 
the world as a common cogitatum. Thus, communalization is not explained 
by the fact that I have along with the other the same world as a cogitatum. 
"Rather, conversely, it follows from the fact that subjects have a common 
world that they are already communalized subjects. "107 Expressed differently: 
"The relatedness of the world, as a meant world, to the subject is, therefore, 
not a relatedness to me as an individual SUbject, but to intersubjectivity. "IO~ 
XI 
An experience of such a completely unique sort is presented here that the 
question of the connection between transcendental subjectity, historical 
occurrence and the universal understanding of being must emerge. I09 For how 
does the logos genuinely makes its appearance? If"phenomenon." beyond the 
99 
traditional observance of "idealism "and "realism," is what identifies itself as a 
unity of sense of a specific type in the corresponding cogitationes, then it is the 
task of a phenomenology to lay open the intentional processes of 
consciousness as accomplishments of the constituting, functioning ego, 
whereby the whole, noematic domain serves as a guiding clue for the 
constitutive inquiries back and whereby, further, the whole field of mundane 
history forms a part of this domain founded by constituting accomplishments. 
The ego and the life of consciousness, which remain as a residuum after 
carrying out the phenomenological reduction, are not "parts of the world" 
when "being," taken in the sense of the "natural thesis of being" as "beir.g 
present at hand," is itself a moment of sense-forming accomplishments.lloThe 
opposition between "nature" and "history," with all of the derivatives such as 
"universal" and "particular," "la w" and "structure," "Object" and "value" and 
"causality" and "teleology" become second in importance to the opposition 
between constitution in its constituting on the one hand and what is 
constituted on the other, for all mundane unities of sense, as noematic poles of 
actual, intentional acts, are related correlatively to the originarily presenting 
accomplishments in which their senses are formed. I II 
From the standpoint of intentional analysis and constitutive investigation, 
then, the decisive distinction is the opposition between the mundane and the 
extra-mundane, because the whole realm of intentional Objects is to be used 
as a guiding clue for constitutive inquiries back, the phenomenon of the 
Objective formation of sense is to be investigated and the origin of the "world" 
as such is to be explicated. ll2 Thus, phenomenology cannot turn away from 
the "world" in its investigations or even exhibit a "world behind the world. " 
Rather, it must describe the ego logical life of consciousness. This means it 
must "see" how the ego constitutes its cogitatum in cogitationes, whereby the 
"how" of the cogitatum's constitution is not itself either a natural or a 
historical pregiven "part of the world" but, rather, is pre-mundane. 
Further, the turn towards (in this respect, transcendental) extra-mundane 
sUbjectity does not mean a turn towards the irrational but, rather, is a 
remaining with the world which is to be understood on the basis of 
consciousness. 113 Implications of sense are present in connection with all 
"parts of the world," implications of sense which refer beyond the what ofthe 
actually given data. Likewise, the mundane being of this "part of the world," 
the phenomenality of the phenomenon and the Objectivity of the Object 
respectively refer beyond the unity of sense which is immediately, matter-of-
factly grasped. Thus, the "phenomenon" must be more than a mere 
"constituted appearance." 
Being an ego and understanding itself as an ego in the true sense does not 
mean, therefore, apprehending itself as a mundane givenness, does not mean 
an understanding derived from a product formed by an apprehension of itself 
or the apprehension of someone else that has already been constituted 
100 
historically in some way. Rather, it means executing the ego cogito cogitatum 
qua cogitatum, 114 by which the correlative relation between the pre-mundane, 
constituting life of consciousness and the mundane, constituted unity of sense 
finds expression. 
At the same time, the occurrenceness of conscious life, which "presents" 
itself from itself as constituting consciousness in the noematically polarized 
intuitions and intentions finds expression. If phenomenology does not wish to 
remain a regional-eidetic description of the essences of that mundanely 
constituted in the domain of natural Objects or historical facts, it cannot look 
away from the historical in the genuine sense. Forconstitutive inquiries back, 
which begin from a given historical situation, do not merely concern what is 
constituted as such but the constitution as well. And constitution is the 
appearance of sense in its appearing, or the autonomous occurring of the 
underivable itself; that is, the occurring of that which shows itself from 
itself. 115 
As mundanieties, "nature" and "history" have their being as being having a 
completely determinate sense; viz., a sense that is essentially graspable 
intersubjectively. Being that is determined in this way, which is itself a 
moment of sense, requires a constituting consciousness as the ultimate origin 
for the bestowal of sense. 116 Therefore, phenomenological idealism 
established in this way does not deny the reality ofthe world and its structures, 
for that this world exists is indisputable. However, it is necessary to clarify just 
this indisputability, which is also a moment of sense, because "sense" is 
bestowed only by mental acts, which are never "empty." As pre-mundane, the 
transcendental ego with its accomplishments is not itself derivable. Thus, 
phenomenology becomes the philosophy of constituting consciousness, the 
consciousness which alone is irreducible. And the only meaning that the 
transcendental ego can have is "constituting's making its appearance in the 
temporalization of history. "117 
XII 
Intentional analysis reveals what shows itself as an Objective object or as an 
historical fact in the natural attitude, an attitude in which interest is focused 
on the noematic pole of the intention, to be a constituted sense. As an 
intersubjectively constituted sense, however, this sense is a mundane-
historically constituted sense. What is mundane-historical certainly has, as 
does everything constituted, its own forms of showing itself. Nevertheless, it 
remains a phenomenon in the sense of a constituted appearance. 1 18 
However, what the grasping of an object is for a mundane, already 
constituted consciousness is the projective constitution of sense for the pre-
mundane, transcendental ego, for the question in this case does not involve a 
101 
universal consideration of projected appearances but the accomplishment of 
that which is the being-a-phenomenon of phenomena according to the 
formula ego cogito cogitatum qua cogitatum. This means equally that the 
(natural-objective or historical de/acto) noema of intentional acts can be an 
individually or intersubjectively referable phenomenon only on the ground of 
the accomplishing projection of phenomenality. This takes place in the 
respective "how" of the actual cogito. 119 
The genuinely historical, accordingly, is not the mundanely historical. 
which is distinguished from other, mundanely constituted objects (such as 
natural objects) only by its particular manner of being originally presented. 
Rather, the genuinely historical lies in the appearing of the phenomenalizing 
cogitatio, an appearing that does not refer back to pregivennesses; that is, the 
genuinely historical lies in the manifestation of noetic-noematic 
consciousness. 120 
Transcendental subjectity, which is not identical with "consciousness in 
general" in the traditional sense, but rather means simply the constituting ego, 
is constituted in its cogitationes as unconditioned by pregivennesses. This is 
the formula I acquire myself "as the pure ego with the pure flow of my 
cogitationes .. . "121 It first becomes possible both through and in cogitationes 
to designate something as the historical "suppporter" of cogitationes as such, 
something which then, as something constituted, could not be the origin. 
Rather, the pre-mundane cogitationes are the origin of everything constituted 
phenomenally, whereby the genuinely historical occurrence is the 
temporalization of the consciousness which is constituted in evidences. 122 
Since mundanieties such as "nature," "history" or "sense-whole" first emerge 
with the evident mental acts of the pure life of consciousness, the 
transcendental ego is extra-mundane, without being by that any less actual. 
Weare ourselves this transcendental ego as the functioning I -pole and, hence, 
not as constituted in this or that way. This means, however, that we are the 
transcendental ego as showing ourselves in constituting. 123 
Within the domain of the phenomenological investigation of constitution 
belongs not only the manifested sense projected in evidences, intentions and 
intuitions, but the sense-projecting itself as well. For there are constituted 
senses which, as constituted and pregiven, are essentially accessible to a 
"universal observer," and there are senses which, without already being 
constituted and, hence, without being present as intersubjectively accessible, 
nevertheless remain senses even if they only, for example, make their 
appearance by being taken up, which is never empty of sense. In a word, sense 
lies not only in the "essences," "possibilities" and "ontic validities" as 
constituted unities of sense, but lies also in the evidence-bestowing 
manifestation of the cogitatio which first shows what its function is in its 
emergence. 124 
The underivability of the cogitationes which manifest themselves in 
102 
evidences means that these accomplishments take place as occurrences. Not 
only does the underivability of the constituting ego show itself in the 
occurrence of evidences, but precisely its self-determination as "thinking" 
shows itself as well. The essence of the constituting cogitationes is exactly 
what they accomplish in acts of constituting, and constituting without resort 
to pregivennesses is intuition. 125 
XIII 
Only the "conscious life of subjectivity which accomplishes the validity of the 
world"126 cannot be reduced. And only the evidences of the correlative 
relation between conscious life and noematic sense justifies the thesis of 
consciousness' presenting something itself; i.e., of intuition, which is 
"transcendental experience." The following proposition. naturally, holds 
phenomenologically: The ego does not confront a reality that is merely to be 
considered and described: rather, entities of all types are constituted in the 
intentional act-life of the cogito, whereby the protodoxic thesis of being 
necessarily belongs to the constituting intentions such that what is seen as an 
"existential belief' from the side of the subject emerges and what is seen as a 
being present at hand [Vorhandensein] from the side of the object makes its 
appearance. 127 
That everything that is "something" or a sense-whole for transcendental 
sUbjectity is a sense-whole constituted/or and by this ego does not, however, 
limit consideration to mundanieties such as "nature" and "history," and the 
uncancelable, distinctive relevance of that which is intersubjectively, 
mundanely constituted for the "natural attitude" does not cause the pure, 
ego logical constitutions to vanish. The phenomenality of the phenomena is 
not a phenomenological "given ness, " a given ness that is itself a 
phenomenon. 128 Rather, it is one originally evidenced accomplishment 
effected in the projecting of the phenomenalizing cogitatio1)es, which is 
precisely the accomplishment of an ego that constitutes itself in its 
functioning. 
The ego manifests the being-a-phenomenon of the intended phenomena in 
the execution of sense-containing cogitationes - and by this, there is only an 
egological evidence. What a determinate phenomenon is according to the idea 
of the thing-in-itself - i.e., that a re-execution by other subjects is possible 
which shows that it is the phenomenon or the ideaL noematic sense-pole of an 
actual, cogitative execution -
presuppose the corresponding projective 
accomplishment itself. That is, it presupposes an unanticipatable execution of 
cogitationes that occurs as an event. 129 Each conceiving and understanding 
exhibits this accomplishment. What is constituted is the evident. and in 
evidence the te/os of the transcendental ego becomes transparent. 
103 
Thus, the ego signifies the spontaneity of consciousness, the fiat which lies 
in consciousness itself and the fiat whose expression is evidence. As a result, 
the originary having something evidently is to be understood as a ray of the 
1.130 This means that "thinking" or the cogitatio does not enter into a domain 
constructed in advance in which the ego freely wanders and manifests its 
spontaneity. Rather, conversely, the fact that something has sense indicates 
the manifestation of spontaneity. Or, if the cogitatio, as "sense-bestowing," is 
the manifestation of spontaneity, then it is also spontaneity with respect to 
itself; that is, the cogitatio is original thinking, not another pre given ness, 
whereby it produces, along with the phenomenalization effected through 
intentions, the temporalization of constituting consciousness as a constituting 
unity.13! 
I n the evidence of that which the intention "means," each intentional 
cogitatio proves to be conscious. And consciousness of this original, sense-
forming cogitatio remains consciousness of its own, constituting 
accomplishment in the intending. 
The cogitatio can be conscious of itself in constitut ing only as a cogitatio 
not directed to mundane-natural or mundane-historical pregivennesses. 
Thus, one can say that sUbjectity is characterized by intentionality as well as 
by self-consciousness. And the transcendental ego's constituting (free) 
function becomes apparent in the auto-genesis ofthe immanent consciousness 
of time. 132 
If every mundaneity, every thing constituted as natural or historical, refers 
back to corresponding forms of sense-formation, then the truly historical, 
viz .. the occurring, is thinking that projects givennesses. This thinking is not 
anticipatable in its accomplishment, for such anticipatability would 
contradict its sense. That is, thinking would itself appear within a horizon of 
anticipation. Therefore, this thinking is not pre given but evidence-
bestowing. 133 Moreover, what is original is neither "being" nor the existential 
belief of the protodoxic "natural thesis of being" but the should-be which is 
manifested in constituting. What is genuinely actual, viz., what effects. are the 
cogitationes in the broadest sense in the "how" of their accomplishment. They 
make possible - post eventum - the investigation of what is constituted as 
noemata and, hence, the invest igation of experience in the ontic realm. I n their 
accomplishment, they project the sense of experience, thinking and 
phenomenal evidence. whereby they are in an eminent degree historical; 
namely, world-constituting in the temporalization of "ontological 
experience. "134 
Everything that can be referred to as a unity of sense is mundane. 
Nevertheless, as a unity of sense it is dependent upon the cogitative, originary 
presentings of something itself. However, we can only speak of the presenting 
of something itself if the "how" of cogitative legitimation is underivable. The 
noemata always correspond to the respective, actual cogitationes in a strict 
104 
correlation such that the phenomena, as mundanely projected appearances, 
are dependent upon the cogitatio which projects and accomplishes 
phenomena, which are phenomena only in their appearing. In a word, the 
"things themselves," which it is necessary to describe, and with regard to their 
constitutive formation as phenomena, to elucidate, are "things" only on the 
ground of the actual projecting of "thingness," which must be manifested by 
the ego and, therefore, which must take place as an occurrence. 135 
Everything that is constituted noematically is phenomenologically and 
intersubjectively graspable: What should be can be manifested egologically. 
For if whatever is determined as a unity of sense is formed in constitutions, 
intentions and intuitions, and if it is valid as a mundane existent, then 
everything depends upon the projection of constitutions, intentions and 
intuitions. As such, they have a special rank, for they are what they are and 
signify only in the accomplishment of that in which their concepts consist. 
Expressed differently, the constitution of transcendental sUbjectity designates 
the occurrence par excellence, for the "world's becoming a world" occurs 
here. 136 
Projecting something as a phenomenon is the historically occurring, 
underivable accomplishment which can only be executed by the ego.137 
Accordingly, the attempt to uncover the sense that the respective phenomena 
contain implicitly is connected with the question concerning the sense of 
historical occurrence. Thus, the question "what is the sense of history?" is 
placed directly alongside the question "what does having a physical body 
mean?" or "what does being an alter ego signify?" - in a word, what must be 
established by the non-mundane elements in order that an X have this or that 
significance? 138 
When it is a question of the occurring as such (and not something simply 
pregiven), the occurring itself is taken as a guiding clue for the corresponding 
inquiry back and not this or that occurrence as a mundane event; for what is 
questioned must be the constitution itself and not what is mundanely 
constituted. Therefore, an intention of a higher order is in question here: 
Something beyond the intention can be seen only in that case where 
something is accomplished in an intention that pertains to the necessary 
condition for the intention. By this, resort to something pregiven is essentially 
halted, for what is in question must be accomplished - i.e., "projected" - in the 
intention. 139 
Therefore, when the sense of the occurring or appearance in its appearing is 
under discussion, it does not matter at first what specifically appears there at 
the time or what exactly occurs. The 0 bject of the discussion is the meaning of 
occurring itself, the meaning of showing-itself-from-itself. Only here is 
prephenomenological, egological experience in the sense of the projecting of 
what should be possible. 140 Subsequent reflection presents an intention other 
than the projecting execution. Thus, what is to be called the genuinely 
105 
"historical" are not "man," "culture," "society" and "class," which are all 
something constituted and mundane. The essentially historical, rather, is the 
transcendental ego as the intentionally constituting ego, the ego which makes 
discussions of man, culture, etc. possible. This signifies a recourse to creative 
intuition. 141 
XIV 
SUbjectity is constituted in evidences as functioning subjectity, and this is its 
auto-genesis. The underivability of the primal ego means that what expresses 
the ego's being is not that constituted as being present at hand but, rather, the 
execution of the constituting itself. Thus, the primal ego projects and 
accomplishes what its significance is. This underivability means further that 
this ego, in such an original, constituting life, projects at the same time an 
object-sphere that is a "primordial" sphere by means of the projection and that 
is, as an accomplishment, an occurring "appearance" of the ego which 
manifests itself as intentional by "self-consciousness," "perception of someone 
else" and the "grasping of the you. "142 Egology is evidence of this I in its being-
a-phenomenon; i.e., in the projecting of the origin. The origin, however, is 
thinking as accomplishing and, to that extent, as historical. The original is 
characterized by the ex pressions "in tuiti on" and "evidence," the historical by 
the expression, phenomenon as "occurrence," "projection" or "evident 
bestowal of sense. "143 
Transcendental subjectity is constituted in executions that bring something 
about, and it proves its cognitive character by this. However, transcendental 
subjectity is constituted as decision, and neither can cognition be based upon 
decision nor decision upon cognition. In the projecting life of the flowing 
cogitationes, "what is" is "decided" by evidences, intuitions and intentions. 144 
The being-a-phenomenon of cogitationes manifested upon their appearing 
is a mode of cognizing or thinking in the sense that the ego itself is what it "is" 
only in cognizing and thinking. As a result, any form of understanding is also 
knowledge. Consequently, any evident manifestation in the projecting of 
something not pregiven is not related to being for the actual accomplishment 
of the ego, an accomplishment which is underivable. Rather, what should 
be l45 is Objectively constituted as beingin-the-truth by the accomplishing of 
presuppositions, and this happens in unanticipatable evidences. 
If it is the sense of phenomenology to accept only what shows itself from 
itself, then the genuine "thing" is transcendental subjectity, for only it is not 
bound to something existing, which always refers to something else within 
determinate horizons and with determinate implications 
-
refers, 
consequently, to a being in 
immanence. In the corresponding 
accomplishments, transcendental sUbjectity is concerned with immanence 
106 
itself, not with transcendence in immanence. 146 The "thing" which in the true 
sense establishes itself from itself and accomplishes what it is in transcendental 
subjectity as constitution; therefore, as the phenomenon which is an 
occurrence. That is, the cogitatio which lives in evidences is not primarily the 
cogitatio on the level of theoretical-universal consideration. Rather, it is the 
cogitatio on the level of the accomplishing of presuppositions on the basis of 
which something is manifested. And since the ego projects itself in its 
cogitationes without being dependent upon the world, it is concerned in its 
constitutions with its accomplishment itself; therefore, with what should be, 
not with what already is.147 
This ego is the "thing" which genuinely establishes itself, and it can be 
understood only from itself. Being-in-the-truth means exactly this, however, 
for it is the accomplishing fulfilment of the conditions for phenomenalizing 
and, hence, is at the same time the auto-genesis of transcendental sUbjectity in 
its constituting. 148 As accomplishment, the egological projecting is not a 
comportment towards existing possibilities but, rather, is a making possible. 
It is that making possible which is historical and which in the genuine sense 
begins. It is not a question of something individually constituted as a unity of 
sense with this or that characteristic, but ofthe projecting of phenomenality as 
such. 
To that extent, the accomplishment of the transcendental ego in the 
cogitatio is also the originative thinking [er-denken] about being, the absurd, 
nothing, etc. By means ofthis accomplishment alone the objectivity of objects, 
the being of the existents and the phenomenality of the phenomena become 
evident. Likewise, the historicity of what occurs historically becomes evident, 
which as a result becomes a phenomenon of a non-Objective type. This means, 
however, that "ontological projection" is the sole mode of "ontological 
experience," and that any egologically evident phenomenon indicates what 
should be; therefore, indicates the historical. 149 We ourselves are egos in the 
ontological projecting and fulfilling of conditions. Therefore, we are egos as 
"I-poles," not as ontic beings constituted in such and such a way. This means, 
however, that we are egos as constituting ourselves as historical, legitimating 
beingslSO and as being-in-the-truth in this understanding. History is the 
phenomenon as appearance in its appearing. It takes place in the occurrence of 
cogitationes. 
xv 
The SUbjective a priori reveals itself in history. Thus it stands at the beginning 
as the arch'e, for without the phansis of the should be, there is no universal 
unfolding of logos, an unfolding that becomes apparent not only in the sense 
and significance of the phainomenon, but also in the hexeis of the concrete ego 
107 
which is concomitantly "constituted" or "generatively formed" in the 
constituting of the phainomenon. Parallel to the concrete "logic of being"151 
stands the "logic of the ego." Expressed differently, "ontology" and "egology" 
make visible both the phenomenal and hexiological founding of unity. 
However, what founds unity are the cogitationes in which the "I-ness" of 
transcendental subjectity governs. The function of the I, however, indicates 
that here it is not a question of a subjective type of mundaneity(therefore, the 
function of the "individual," the "personal" or the "subject"). SUbjectity lies in 
the ability to let something arise in the way of an occurrence without reference 
to pregivennesses. 
This grounding of itself through accomplishments, which becomes clear in 
this, is evidence for an effecting actuality beyond the former types of " realism" 
and "idealism." Insofar as the universal, subjective a priori not only is revealed 
hut is revealed for itself, the first beginning is logos-ology. When it is a 
question of the historical projecting ("appearing as an occurrence") of 
structures of being, transcendental phenomenology cannot be understood in 
terms of a "universal observer," as it is in connection with intentional analysis 
and the investigation of habitus: Transcendental phenomenology becomes 
speCUlative. 
The "ratio in the constant movement of self-elucidation"152 is in question 
here. So understood, transcendental phenomenology does not always have as 
its theme entities which it grasps and makes known. If it were understood in 
this way, it would be unable to acquire the concept of being in the objectively 
legitimizable phenomenon as such. Thus, transcendental phenomenology 
must return to the phenomenon of reason that accomplishes and projects 
presuppositions. 
Reason "externalizes" itself in the emergence of cogitationes. These 
cogitationes do not themselves form a new, higher-level part of the world, they 
are not an entity established in some way. They function, rather, as the 
presupposition by means of which one can speak of entities, world, objects 
and habitus. As grounding, these cogitative presuppositions are not 
themselves like things. It is accomplishing transcendental subjectity projected 
in cogitationes that is addressed when the being-a-phenomenon of "objects," 
the being-a-thing of things, the being self-evident of what is in the world, the 
naturalness of an attitude and the familiarity of habitualities are under 
discussion. These cogitationes which ground apprehensions are themselves 
non-objective and show a pro.iecting of structural frameworks that is not a 
reproductive projectmg. In the cogitationes, for example, the object-structure 
as such becomes transparent without being intended as this structure. 153 Thus, 
a projection of experience expresses itself in the structure-predelineating 
cogitationes, which as a projection is not Objective but is the accomplishment 
of sUbjectity. 
The cogitationes are, thus, ultimately the locus of the "translucent 
108 
encounter of the world." Concomitant with everything that can be 
apprehended in cogitationes, that which makes possible and is not objective 
becomes transparent indirectly. Perhaps it is correct to say: 
It is precisely with this that there begins a philosophy with the deepest and most 
universal self-understanding of the philosophizing ego as the bearer of absolute reason 
which comes to itself, of the philosophizing ego as implying, in its apodectic being-for-
itself, its fellow subjects and all possible fellow philosophizing egos. This is the 
discovery of absolute intersubjectivity ... as that in which reason. in obscurity, in 
elucidation, in the movement of lucid self-understanding, is in infinite progress; the 
discovery of the necessary, concrete manner of being of absolute (in the ultimate sense. 
transcendental) subjectivity in a transcendental life of the constant"constitution of the 
world."154 
Each cogitatio, which as such is intentionally directed to something that the 
cogitatio presents with this or that sense, is at the same time a cogitatio that 
proves intentionality and, hence, projects it. Genuine history precedes here in 
the becoming evident and manifesting of sUbjective forms. The result is an 
outline ofthe framework for that which not yet "is. "Transcendental subjectity 
proves to be the ground of structure, of form as such. It cannot be grasped as 
something objective. Indeed, it is the presupposition for that which comes to 
view as something objective, particular, existent. If transcendental subjectity 
is subjectum veritatis, then it is so only as the condition or the accomplishing 
ground for truth. For: "All the rationality of the fact lies in the a priori. "155 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
aRespectively,"first principle," "appearing," "acquired disposition" (the Latin 
translation of which is "habitus'), and "reason." The reader should also be 
familiar with the distinction between "cogitatio" (plural" cogitationes'), the act 
of thinking, and "cogitatum" (plural "cogitata"), the object of thought. 
b Funke uses two German words to distinguish between two senses of object: the 
correlate of any conscious act (Gegenstand), and the correlate of an act having 
the sense "accessible to anyone" (Objekt). To preserve this distinction, object 
spelled with a small "0" shall be the translation of Gegenstand and its 
derivatives, Object with a capital "0" that of Objekt and its derivatives. 
cThis rendering, approved by Funke, varies from the original text. which reads: 
"It is a fact that valid objects exist for consciousness; for consciousness, 
everything foulld within it is a 'Heraclitean flux of phenomena'." The sense in 
which objects or phenomena are "within" consciousness refers to Husserl's 
doctrine of "transcende'nce in immanence"(cf. below, author's footnote l6)and 
should not be confused with psychic or real immanence. 
d We have added, with Funke's approval, "what pertains expressly to, "for the two 
moments are, though distinct, nonetheless related. 
eReading "reduction" for "deduction." 
I Reading "constituted" for "grounded." 
\09 
AUTHOR'S NOTES 
1. E. Husserl, The Idea of Phenomenology (lP), G-p. 17. 
2. Ibid., G-p. 19. 
3. Ibid., G - p. 47. 
4. H. Barth, "Philosophie der Existenz," Jahrbuch d. Schweiz. Phil. Gesellschaft, 2 
(1943) pp. 31ff. 
S. Husserl, IP, G p. 23. 
6. A. Diemer, Edmund Husserl (Meisenheim: A. Hain, 1956), p. 18 and footnote 
31. 
7. E. Husserl, Formal and Transcendental Logic (FTL), G-p. 222. "The subjective 
a priori precedes the being of God and world, the being of everything, 
individually and collectively, for me, the thinking subject. Even God is for me 
what he is in consequence of my own accomplishments of consciousness; here, 
too, I must not look aside lest I commit a supposed blasphemy, rather I must see 
the problem." 
8. E. Husserl, Paris Lectures (PL), G-p. 13. Further Cartesian Meditations ( CM), 
G-p. 70 and the Crisis q{ European Sciences (Crisis), E-pp. l70ff, G-pp. 173ff. 
9. HusserL CM, G-p. 119. 
10. Cf. R. H onigswald, Deutsche systematische Philosophie nach ihren Gestaltern, 
Led. H. Schwarz (Berlin, 1931), p. 193. 
II. Cf. the fundamental investigations of Erich Rothacker concerning "Die 
dogmatische Denkform in den Geisteswissenschaften und das Problem des 
Historismus," Mainzer Akademie d. Wiss. Jahr., # 6 (1954), pp. 253-54. 
12. Cf. Husserl's manuscript CI6 vi. p. I in which phenomenology as archaeology 
appears. Cf. also Diemer, p. 19, footnote 33. 
13. E. H usserl, Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology (Ideas), E - p. 
84. (Funke's reference is to the 1913 ed., p. 44.) 
14. Cf. N. Hartmann's position in his Der Aujbauderrealen Welt (Berlin, 1940), pp. 
171 ff. 
15. Cf. T. Litt, Mensch und Welt (Munich: Federman, 1948), especially the 
"Unableitbarkeit des Geistes," pp. 153ff or his Denken und Sein (Stuttgart: S. 
Hirzel, 1948), the chapter "Sein, Denken und Sichselbstdenken," pp. 144ff. 
16. Husserl, PL, G - p. 32. "Transcendence is an immanent characteristic of being 
that is constituted within the ego" is the clearest expression of Husserl's 
understanding of "transcendence in immanence." 
17. Husserl, CM, G - p. 92. Husser! explains: "Reason is not an accidental, defacto 
ability, not a title for possible, accidental matters offact but, rather, a title for an 
all-embracing, essentially necessary structural form 
belonging to all 
transcendental SUbjectivity." 
18. Cf. the exposition concerning "thinking thinking itself' by Litt, Denken und 
Sein, pp. I 47ff. "An actuality whose only relation to thinking is that it can be 
thought and that, therefore, has the thinking contemplator external to itself 
under all circumstances - such an actuality has, in fact, the whole of its properties 
and modes of behavior for itself such that nothing is constituted with respect to 
its being and being thus whether it is thought or not. That it is a possible object of 
thought exhausts its relation to thinking. For actualities of this kind, to be 
thought is a fate that does not in the least alter their essence. The case is different, 
then, if thinking, through which the: actuality is thought, does not have the 
actuality that is thought external to itself but, rather, excercises itself; therefore, 
if the being-thought is a self-thinking." 
110 
19. Husserl's manuscript F I 23. p. 150. Cited by Diemer. p. 83. footnote 36. 
20. Ibid" p. 14X. 
21. E. Husser!. Ideen II. p. 103. 
22. Husser!. CM. G-p. 102. 
2,\. Husser!. Ideen II. p. 101. 
24. Ibid. 
25. Husser!. CM. p. 109. (Our translation.) 
26. Husser!. Ideen II. pp. iliff. Husser! explains: "To these belong unities such as the 
abiding meanings of one and the same subject. One can call these 'habitual' in a 
certain sense. However. the l(uestion does not concern a habitual hahilus that 
the empirical subject of real dispositions acquires. a hahilus that is called 
habitual in that case. The hahitus in l(uestion here belongs to the pure I. not the 
empirical I. The identity of the pure I lies not only in the fact that the I (again. the 
pure I) can grasp itself as the identical I of the cogito by looking at any cogito. 
Rather. the I is abo the same I of the cof{ito. and is ,0 a priori. because I exerci,e 
necessary consel(uences in my position-takings in a determinate seme. Everv 
'new' position-taking institutes an abiding meaning .... " 
27. Diemer. Edmund Husser/. p. IRO. 
2X. Husser!. Idem II. p. 112. 
29. Ibid" p. 1l..1 . 
.\0. Ibid .. p. lOS. 
31. Husser!. CM. G-p. 58. 
,\2. Ibid" G pp. 100ff . 
.\3. H usserl's manuscript F I II. p. 29. Also cited by Diemer. p. 83. 
34. Husserl, Ideen II, p. 116. 
3S. Ibid. 
36. Husser!. Crisis. E 
p. 153. G - p. 156. 
37. Ibid" E-p. 33R. G-p. 273. 
3g. Husser!. CM, G-p. lOR. (Our translation.) 
39. Husserl, Ideen II, p. 103. 
40. Ibid. In way of clarification. Husserl says: "To the pure I. therefore. belongs. 
instead of arising and passing away, only the essential peculiarity that it has its 
coming forward and departure. that it actually begins and ceases to function. to 
govern' 'I t comes forward' and 'acts in the specific sense of the cof{ilo occur in the 
flow of consciousness' say the same thing. since the essence of such acts lies in 
their 'being intentional processes executed' hy the pure 1.'-
..+ I. Roma n I ngarden. in his remarks concerning the Cartesian Meditations. has 
taken an informative position with respect to the problem presented here (i.e., 
the constitution of "habitual properties"). Cf. Husser!. CM, Gpp. 21Sft'. 
(Ingarden\ commentary is not included in the English translation.) 
42. E. H usserl, The Phenomenology of' Intana/ Time-Consciousness (PITC), 
appendix 12. 
4J. Husser!. Ideas, E p. 213. (Funke's reference is to the HlIsserliana cd .. p. 194. 
44. Ihid., E-p. 214, G-p. 19S. For a different interpretation. cf. Diemer. D/lI1l1nd 
Husser!, p. 176. 
4S. Husser!' Idl'en II, p. 196. 
"+6. Husser!. PITC, appendix g. 
"+7. Fr. Bassenge. "Hex is und Akt, "Philosophische Anzl'iger, (1920-30). pp. 163-
68. 
4g. Husserl, eM, G -p. 58. 
49. Ibid .. G 
pp. 1001. 
III 
50. Husserl, PITC, Sections 35, 36, and 39. 
51. Cf. R. Ingarden's remarks, CM, G-p. 215. 
52. Husserl, CM, G-p. 100. 
53. Ibid. 
54. G. Brand, Welt, lch und Zeit (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1955). Section II. 
55. Ibid., p. 61. 
56. Husserl, PITC, E-p. 106, G-p. 434. 
57. Diemer, Edmund Husserl, pro 160ff. 
58. Ibid., p. 161. 
59. Husserl, CM, Section 32, "The I as the Substrate of Habitualities." 
60. Husserl, PL, G-p. 32, and CM, Section II. 
61. Cf. R. Ingarden's remarks, CM, G-p. 216. 
62. Ibid. 
63. Husserl, PlTC, E-pp. 153-54, G-pp. 466-67. (Our translation.) 
64. Ibid., E-p. 109, G-pp. 436-37. (Our translation.) 
65. The distinction between "transcendence" and "para-transcendence" is made 
here in a different sense than it was by Oscar Becker in his address to the Paris 
Congress (August 1-6, 1937) concerning "transcendence" and 
"paratranscendence." There "essence" (Dawesen) was contrasted with 
"existence" (Dasein) and "para-ontological identity" (the essence is identical to 
that of which it is the essence) was contrasted with "ontological difference" 
(being surpasses the existent). Cr. further O. Becker, "Para-Existenz 
(Menschliches Dasein und Dawesen)," "Blatter fiir deutsche Philosophie, 17 
(1943), pp. 62-95. 
66. Husserl, CM, G-p. 100 (Our translation.) 
67. Ibid. 
68. Ibid. (Our translation.) 
69. Ibid., G - p. 101. (Our translation.) 
70. O. Becker, "Transzendenz und Paratranszendenz," Travaux du IX Congres 
intern. de phi/os., 8 (1937), p. 100. 
71. Husserl, PITC, E-p. 161. G-pp. 471ff. (Our translation.) 
72. Ibid., E-p. 162, G p. 472. 
73. Husserl, CM. G-p. 101. 
74. Cf. Maximilian Beck's review and critique of Martin Heidegger's Being and 
Time in Phi/osophische Hefle (1928), Book I, Section 2, # 5 (concerning Husserl). 
75. Ibid. 
76. Husserl, Crisis, E-pp. 337ff. G-pp. 271 ff. 
77. The discussion here does not concern the metaphysical theory of actuality 
according to which the actual should exist in living effecting (Bergson) or the 
self-movement of spirit (Gentile) as opposed to being at rest. Cf. Bergson, 
Wahrnehmung der Veriinderung and Gentile, L 'alto del pensare come alto 
puro. 
78. G. 
Frey, "Phanomenologische und operationale Begriindung der 
Naturwissenschaften," Kanlsludien, 45 (1953-54) pp. 33-54. 
79. Ibid., p. 54. 
80. Ibid., p. 44. 
81. This was made clear in the confrontation between Descartes and Gassendi 
concerning the Meditations. 
82. T. Lit!, Denken und Sein, p. 165. 
83. T. Lilt, Mensch lind Welt, p. 297. 
84. W. Miiller, Die Philosophie Edmund Husserls nach den Grundziigen ihrer 
112 
Entstehung und illlem srstematischen Gehalt (Bonn: H. Bouvier. 1956). above 
all. Section 19, pp. 69ff. 
85. Ibid .. p. 69. 
86. Husserl. Crisis. E p. 151. G-p. 154. 
87. Ibid. 
88. Husser!. CM. Gp. 181. 
89. Diemer, Edmund Husserl. p. 181. Justifiably, Diemer refers to this again and 
again. 
90. Husser!. PL G - p. 10. 15.29. 
91. Husser!. CM. G - p. 101. 
92. W. MUller. Die Phi/os. E. Husserls, pp. 72ff. 
93. Husserl manuscript M III 9 II, pp. 4-5. 
94. G. Funke. tur transzendentalen Phdnomenologie (Bonn: H. Bouvier. 1957). 
above all. Chapter 3, pp. 26ff. 
95. Q. Lauer. Plll;nom(mologie de Husserl (Paris: Presses U ni\crsitaires de France, 
1955), Chapter 5. p. 317n. 
96. Husser! manuscript M 1\1 9 II. p. 7. 
97. Husserl manuscript B IV 6 a Q I. 
98. Ibid. 
99. Husserl manuscript R IV 6 a. 
100. Ibid. 
101. Ibid. 
102. N. Hartmann, "Der Megarische und Aristotelischc MogliehkeitsbegrifL" 
Akademie der Wissenschafien (Berlin. 1937). 
103. Husser! manuscript B IVa and 6c. 
104. HusserL CM, Section 42fT. 
105. Ibid., Sections 43-54. 
106. Ibid., Sections 50-54 concerning appresentation. 
107. W. MUller. Die Phi/os. Edmund Husserls, p. 81. 
108. L Landgrebe. Phiinomenologie und Metaphysik (Hamburg: 1949), pp. 168-80. 
109. The following ideas are summarized in the author's "Mundane Geschichte, 
ontologischc Erfahrung und transzendentale SUbjektivitiit." Phi/os. lahrbuch, 
64 (1956). pp. 361-71. 
110. Husser!. eM, G-pp. 168ff. 
Ill. HusserL Ideas, Section 84. (Funke's reference is to the 1928 ed .. pp. 168ff.) 
112. E. Fink, "The Phenomenological Philosophy of Edmund Husser! and 
Contemporary Criticism." in the Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl. ed. R. 
Elveton (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1970). p. 97. 
113. E. Fink. "Was will die Phiinomenologie Edmund Husser!s," Die Tatwelt, 10. 
(1934), p. 31. 
114. Husserl, eM, G-p. 74. 
115. Cf. E. Levinas, En decouvrant I'existence avec Husserl et Heidegger (Paris: J. 
Vrin, 1949), Section II. 
116. Husser!, Ideas, Section 145. (Funke's reference is to the 1928 ed., p. 303.) 
117. Cf. T. Lilt, Mensch und Welt, Chapter 10. 
118. Husser!, eM, G-p. 90. 
119. E. Levinas, pp. 40-41. 
120. Cf. HusserL CM, Section 23 where he speaks of "transcendental constitution" 
as well as "reason" and "irrationality." 
121. Ibid., G-p. 61. 
122. Ibid., G-p. 190. 
113 
123. Husser!, Crisis. Section 50. 
124. Cf. T. Lit!, Mensch und Welt. p. 293. 
125. Ibid., pp. 168, 292ff. 
126. Husser!, Crisis. E-pp. 151-53, G-pp. 154. 156. 
127. Husser!, Ideas, Section 103. (Funke's reference is to the 1928 ed., p. 215.) 
128. Cf. E. Fink, " L 'analyse intentionnelle et Ie probJeme de la pensee speculative," 
Prohlemes actuels de la phenomen%gie. ed. H.L. von Breda (Paris: Brouwer, 
1952), pp. 70ff. This article is included in Fink's Ndhe und Distanz (Freiburg: 
Karl Alber, 1976). pp. 139-57. 
129. Cf. H. Barth. "Philosophie der Existenz," p. 34. 
130. Cf. E. Levinas. En decouvrant I'existence, pp. 40ff. 
131. Ibid" p. 41. 
132. Husser!, PlTC. E-p. 100. G-p. 429. 
133. Cf. H. Barth. pp. 34-35. 
134. Cf. E. Fink, "Zum Problem der ontologischen Erfahrung," Aetas del primero 
congreso nacional de ji/osoj/a, Mendoza (1950), pp. 739ff. Now available in 
Fink. Niihe und Distanz. pp. 127ff. 
135. E. Fink, "L 'analyse intentionnelle," pp. 70, 76, 78, 84. 
136. T. Lilt, Mensch und Welt, p. 293. 
137. Husserl, CM, Section 60ff. 
138. Cf. G. Berger, The Cogito in Husserl's Philosophy, tr. K. McLaughlin 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1972), pp. 85-86. 
139. T. Lit!, Mensch und Welt. pp. 153, 292ff. 
140. Cf. E. Fink, "Zum Problem der ontologischen Erfahrung," pp. 739ff. 
141. Cf. Berger, pp. 79ff. 
142. Husser!, Crisis, Section 54b. 
143. Berger, p. 79. 
144. Cf. H. Barth, "Philosophie der Existenz," pp. 33ft'. 
145. Concerning egology, teleology and the should be, see Husser!, Crisis, Section 
73G (appendix 4E). 
146. Husser!, eM, G-p. 109. "The ego is constituted for itself, so to speak, in the 
unity of a history." (our translation.) 
147. Cf. H. Barth. pp. 33-37. 
148. E. Fink, "Zum Problem del' ontologischen Erfahrung," p. 738. 
149. Ibid. 
150. H usserL Crisis, Section 50. 
151. Husserl, CM. G-p. 181. 
152. Husser!. Crisis. E-p. 338, G-p. 273. 
153. This relation returns anthropologically when one says: "Human reality is a 
question of something and is its own questioning of itself." J. Delhomme, La 
pensee inlerrogative (Paris. 1954). pp. 39ff. 
154. Husser!. Crisis. E-p. 340. Gp. 275. 
155. Husserl. CM, G-p. 181. 
REFLECTIONS ON THE FOUNDATION OF THE RELATION 
BETWEEN THE A PRIORI AND THE EIDOS IN THE 
PHENOMENOLOGY OF HUSSERL * 
THERESA PENTZOPOULOU-VALALAS 
To compare the a priori and the eidos in the phenomenology of Husserl is to 
close oneself in a circle, to enter into a labyrinth the end of which is the same as 
the point of departure. For the eidos is truely a priori and the a priori is 
essentially eidetic. There is thus an identity of terms that an explicit note of 
Husserl appears to found de jure. I It is, however, an identity of two notions 
which must be grasped in a different movement of thought. In Husserlian 
language: one cannot intend the a priori in the same way that one intends the 
eidos. 
All essence, that which is general in the individual, is necessarily a priori, for 
its generality appears to be independent of all experience. But is all a priori, 
essence? Or better still, is the a priori essence'! On the other hand, can one 
speak at all of an essence which would not be a priori? Isn't the very 
formulation contradictory? How, then, are we to conceive of their 
relationship, posited from the start as a relation of identity? Ifwe succeed in 
setting off the phenomenological sense of the a priori, we find ourselves at the 
very heart of the problem of the possibility of the phenomenological method, 
for once the a priori is established, the task of phenomenology stands out with 
clarity. 
In view of the complexity of the problems presented from the start, it 
appears that there is but one way to proceed: that is, to search for the sense 
proper to each notion, remaining as close as possible to Husserlian thought. 
We are then going to situate ourselves in a double perspective that requires 
first of all a work of clarification. First, we will indicate the different senses 
that H usserl gave to the a priori, setting off the profound significance of this 
notion without turning it into a logical or ontological entity. We will then do 
the same with the notion of th e eidos, and finally try to grasp the relation tha t 
unites the two notions through the laying bare of its foundation. 
*Translated by Laurence E. Winters from "Reflexions sur Ie fondement du rapport 
entre I'a priori et I'eidos dan~ la phenomenologie de Husserl," Kant-Studien, 1974 (65), 
Heft 2, pp. 135-5\. 
114 
115 
This way is dictated by methodological considerations. For, if there is a 
philosophy which does not pass itself off as a rational system, founded upon 
concepts constructed by reason, it is definitely phenomenology, which does 
not intend to be a theory but a method of elucidation and of eidetic 
description, a method of uncovering the invisible, according to Husserl's 
formulation. 2 Thus to lay bare the phenomenological sense of the a priori, a 
sense that Husserl called the only"genuine" one,3 it is necessary to proceed in a 
sometimes pedantic way, but one that offers the advantage of casting some 
light onto the notions that, at first glance, are obscurely and confusedly 
presented. 
The study, then. will be comprised of three parts. In the first two, we will 
attempt to remain close to the two notions in order to improve our grasp of 
their phenomenological sense. In the third part, we will try to see in what way 
the a priori and the eidos interpenetrate, are imbued with each other. which 
will lead us to pose the problem of the foundation of their relation. 
A. THE HUSSERLIAN A PRIORI AND ITS DIVERSE SENSES 
The reading of Husserl reveals an astonishing wealth of qualifications 
attributed to the a priori. In fact, Husserl speaks of a constitutive a priori,5 of 
an universal a priori, 6 of an ontic a priori., 7 of a su bjective a priori,8 of an innate 
a priori. 9 As well, he speaks in an indirect way of an essentia I a priori, of an a 
priori, that is to say, which he identifies with eidetic necessity.1O 
Before this wealth of expressions we have only one weapon that is effective 
for the comprehension of this notion. This weapon is the simplicity of 
Husserlian thought, which, through the labyrinth of a particularly complex 
terminology, is revealed with the clarity of the thought of a mathematician. 
This thought is expressed in the well known formulation: cogito-cogitatum 
qua cogitatum. 
We did not mention above the formal a priori since the formal aspect of the 
a priori is the easiest to grasp, as it is understood that all the formal is 
necessarily a priori. I I Certainly, this does not mean that this aspect of the a 
priori does not raise sensitive problems in phenomenology, for the formal 
draws near to the eidetic as it is itself essentially eidetic, taking a specifically 
phenomenological sense. For the moment let us limit ourselves to pointing out 
that the formal a priori is particularly apparent in the logical thought of 
Husser!. 
In effect, formal ontology and pure logic are situated in the domain of the a 
priori from the start. This is because formal ontology is nothing but an a priori 
doctrine of the 0 bject and formal apophansis is nothing but the a priori science 
of the categories of signification. Categories of signification and objective 
categories place before consciousness an ideal objectivity and it was one ofthe 
116 
tasks of the Prolegomena to correctly bring to consciousness the ideal object 
in opposition to empirical fact. 12 And, as Rene Scherer remarks. all the 
movements of Husserlian thought in the first four Investigations lead to the 
formal a priori, to the a priori of abstract ideality. Thus, the formal a priori is 
the logical a priori, the objective a priori. This a priori is essentially designated 
by independence with regard to all empirical singularity .14 The formal a priori 
then determines the content of science in general. For. if for Kant, science is 
grounded on the givens a posteriori. the givens of experience; for H usserl, 
these same givens are a priori since they are constituted in the intentionality of 
consciousness. 15 
Now, it is necessary to oppose to this formal a priori the SUbjective a priori 
implied in the very notion of the intentionality of consciousness. This is the 
most interesting aspect of the Husserlian theory of the a priori. The two a 
priori are opposed and yet they are not independent of each other. They exist 
only through their a priori correlation, though this formulation may be a little 
surprising. Let us say immediately, anticipating what is to follow, that the 
SUbjective a priori designates the a priori structures of consciousness. The 
correlation between the objective and the SUbjective a priori signifies that to 
each structure of the object corresponds a priori a structure of consciousness. 
The expression "structure of the object" designates in its turn, all the a priori 
laws that govern the ideal objectivities, that is, the fundamental laws of pure 
logic,16 
Thus. the subjective structures are correlated to the objective a priori, a 
correlation which is itself a priori. 17 We find then that the correlation between 
the two notions becomes the essential theme. the very essence of 
phenomenology, according to Scherer. We will have occasion to return to this 
notion of correlation. What is of interest here is seeing that the formal a priori 
opens the way to the subjective a priori by displaying the independence ofthe 
ideal with regard to subjectivity: the question is henceforth, in what way does 
the subject grasp the objective ideality. Thus the formal a priori opens the way 
to the possibility of thinking the subjective act by which the objective is meant, 
posited a priori over against intentional consciousness. 19 
Let us turn then to the side of the subjective a priori which Husserl situated 
on the side of the knowing subject, on the side, that is to say, of intentional 
consciousness. 2o As we have already said, it is necessary to understand by the 
subjective a priori, the a priori structures of the modes of consciousness by 
which consciousness constitutes its object. That is, the SUbjective a priori 
designates the intentional structure of consciousness, an essentially a priori 
structure. The formulation "constitution of the object" in the Husserlian 
sense, signifies the a priori synthesis by which consciousness in intending the 
object, constitutes it by giving it sense, a sense with which the object is itself 
given evidently to consciousness.21 In Kantian terms, we would say that the 
H usserlian a priori is found in the object, in the subject, and in the synthesis by 
117 
which the subject grasps the object. It is evident that we cannot limit ourselves 
to this image which poorly expresses the thought of H usserl, because it 
appears to be founded upon the cogito-cogitatio relation and not on the 
cogito-cogitatum relation, the relation which is the foundation of the 
Husserlian phenomenological edifice. It is, then, in this fundamental idea of 
cogitatum that it will henceforth be necessary to attempt to specify the 
sUbjective a priori, and what is called cogitatum, intentional lived experience 
(vecu) and its noetic-noematic structure. 
Let us, however, look more closely at what we call for simplicity's sake, "a 
priori synthesis." It is the act by which intentional consciousness which 
intends its object, grasps it in its phenomenal being, its sense that is the very 
essence of the object. It is through this same act that the object, intentionally 
considered, is constituted. The a priori synthesis designates, then, nothing 
other than the constitutive achievement of consciousness. 22 And constitution 
signifies nothing other than the "giving of the thing itself," the "process 
through which the object of experience is formed."23 
Thus the constitution of the objective: world comes about in and through 
intentional consciousness.24 But this constitution does not only signify that 
the world is "present" to my consciousness at a certain moment, that is, at the 
moment when the gaze of consciousness intends it. The act of constitution 
signifies that the world is constituted in its essence as an object which, outside 
the limitations oftime, remains self-identical, an object which is established as 
a set of unities that one is able at any moment to identify (identijizierbare 
Einheiten)25 through the diverse perceptions that give it to us in the form ofa 
phenomenal unity.26 When we turn, then, to the side of the subject to seek the 
sUbjective a priori, we come up against the great phenomenological problem 
of constitution. And, as is well known, this problem is the very theme of 
phenomenology.27 
Let us consider more closely, then, the place of the a priori from the 
perspective of the intentionality of consciousness. We know in what sense 
Husserl understood the constitution of the objective world by consciousness. 
This world is in consciousness as a "phenomenon," it draws all its beings-sense 
from me, from this ego that is no longer the empirical ego, but the 
transcendental ego, the source of all constitutive accomplishments. 28 Now, 
this giving of sense that makes the world a phenomenal being existing 
uniquely for me, and drawing its validity from me, could not come about as 
the result of empirical observation. We do not factually establish that the 
world has received a sense. The world is constituted a priori according to rules 
that are themselves a priori, but that, however, do not exist outside the 
object.29 In the contrary instance, we would find ourselves in a situation 
analogous to that in which the Kantian synthesis placed us. 
Thus the constitution of the objective world by constituting subjectivity 
reveals the presence of an "a priori of the phenomenon," a phenomenon 
118 
which appears in the mode of the real or of the possible. 3o Doesn't this a priori 
of the phenomenon call to mind the a priori of the lived-through-experience 
(vecu) about which Scherer speaks when he displays the radicalism of the 
Logical Investigations?31 In effect, what does the expression "the world as 
phenomenon" fundamentally signify if not the a priori of being-an-object,32 
since the sense of the being of the object is constituted, we are going to claim, 
by intentional consciousness? Thus we are able to formulate the following 
statement: for Husserl there is only transcendental constitution a priori. 
N ow, let us fully explicate this: the subjective a priori which one uncovers in 
the a priori of the lived-through-experience (vecu) is not the Kantian a priori 
which is posited as independent of and prior to experience. The Husserlian a 
priori is the a priori of experience in the phenomenological sense ofthe term. 34 
The Husserlian a priori in no way implies the antithesis of reason and 
experience. On the contrary, it is positioned at the conjunction of experience, 
understood as evidence, and intelligibility which implies the constitution of 
the object as constituted sense. The a priori then becomes the "ultimate source 
of all rationality" as Scherer comments. 35 
Let us stop here and attempt to summarize the path followed to this point. 
Beginning with the idea of the great diversity of sense that, for Husserl, 
accompanies the notion of the a priori, we have tried to clarify these different 
senses taking as a point of departure the notion of the formal a priori. This led 
us to the idea of the sUbjective a priori which can only be grasped through the 
prism of transcendental constitution. Indeed, the relation between the 
constituted object and the constituting subject permitted us to isolate the idea 
of the a priori of the phenomenon. Now, the a priori of the phenomenon is an 
a priori that can only be grasped in relation to the transcendental ego. Thus 
we arrived at the fundamental notion of the constitutive a priori. It is this 
constitutive a priori that reveals itself to be in its essence an universal a priori. 
Let us attempt, then, to clarify the universal character of the Husserlian a 
priori. To do this it will be necessary to turn one more time to the side of the 
transcendental ego. For it is at the core of this transcendental subjectivity 
which Husser! calls the transcendental ego that we find the idea of 
universality. To this end, let us cite a text of the Cartesian Meditations which 
appears to us to be particularly revealing on this subject: "The universal a 
priori," writes Husser!. "pertaining to a transcendental ego as such is an 
essential form which includes an infinity of forms, an infinity of a priori types 
of (possible)" actualities and potentialities of life along with the objects 
constitutable in a life as objects actually existing. "31> However, how must we 
conceive of the way the universal a priori belongs to the transcendental ego? It 
is here that the idea of the eidos emerges. F or methodological reasons we wil1 
continue the analysis bearing on the universal a priori, granting as known the 
sense of the eidos. 
In the fourth Cartesian Meditation, Husser! speaks explicitly of the 
119 
universality of the eidos, of the general essence. The eidos is "prior to all 
concepts" understood as verbal significations; these, as pure concepts, should 
be consistent with the eidos. 37 Universality characterizes the very essence of 
the transcendental ego, since this, isolated from the empirical self after the 
reduction, is the field of the constitution of all real or ideal possibilities. 38 The 
transcendental ego designa tes basically the essence of subjectivity, an essence 
that makes the transcendental ego the source of all the a priori. It is in this 
sense that it is necessary to interpret Scherer's formulation that the a priori 
signifies a science of the essence. 39 The elucidation of all the a priori forms of 
this science constitutes the nature of phenomenological description. To 
describe phenomenologically is not to submit to what happens, Scherer 
remarks, but it is to delimit the a priori of the invariant in all consciousness. 
The evidence to which phenomenological description refers is that of the 
consciousness of essence, of the "universe of the conceivable. "40 The a priori of 
the invariant signifies the a priori of the eidos, and the "conceivable universe" 
is the universal a priori. We are then able to say that the expression "universal a 
priori" signifies in the last analysis, the universal unity of the whole (ensemble) 
of constitution (a priori) achieved in my ego according to its essential forms.41 
Now, if we remember that the whole of constitution essentially includes the 
whole of the objective world continually constituted by consciousness 
according to the a priori laws of constitution, laws that are in fact the rules of a 
priori structure, we are able to comprehend how Husserl moved from an 
universal a priori to the idea of an ontological a priori because the constitution 
of the world poses the problem of the ontology of the world, a necessarily a 
priori ontology.42 And it should not be forgotten that the constituted world is 
a world constituted as phenomenon, which does not have existential 
pretention, while having, nevertheless, a sense of being of an objective 
validity. The study of the set of a priori structures of a world constituted as 
phenomenon would be the object of the a priori ontology of the real world. 
We thus see the relation between the eidos and the a priori sketched at the 
core of the universal a priori. Let us dwell longer on this idea of the universal a 
priori which Husserl posited at the same time as a constitutive a priori. 43 We 
know that our conscious life includes all the objectivities that are actually or 
potentially constituted by the intentional achievements of our conscious-
ness.44 Now, when one speaks of all the objects-for-consciousness at the same 
time one implies the entire field of intentional consciousness according to 
the great phenomenological principle of correlation which requires that each 
cogitatio be accompanied by its cogitatum. There is, then, on the one side 
potential subjective accomplishments and on the other, potentially 
constituted objectivities.b It would be this eidetic relation that would give 
concrete content to the idea of the universal constitutive a priori. It was thus 
that Husserl wrote: "the whole life of consciousness is governed by a universal 
constitutional a priori, embracing all intentionalities. "45 Now we are again able 
120 
to throw into relief the presence of the idea of essence, since this correlation 
between the constitutive accomplishment and the constituted objectivities is 
an eidetic correlation.46 
This idea of correlation, then, is the idea which best serves to elucidate the 
relation a priori - eidos.47 The correlation between the constitutive and the 
constituted signifies, quite simply, a correlation between that which gives sense 
and that which receives this sense. Now, this relation which we uncover at the 
heart of the correlation between the a priori and the eidos implies the eidetic 
(non-empirical) possibility of varying, as well, the constitutive forms, or 
alternately, the modes of intentional consciousness (I am able to see, to 
imagine, to feel, to will) which the forms constituted. It is known that that 
which receives its sense through the transcendental ego acquires the status of a 
phenomenal being uniquely valid for me. Therefore, to each constitutive 
form corresponds an ontic form. This is the true sense of the Husserlian a 
priori. 48 
Arriving at this point in our exposition we are able only to observe a 
significant absence: that of the material a priori. Now it does not seem possible 
to fully grasp the material a priori in H usserl, if we do not from the outset 
proceed through the idea of the eidos and of essence in general. Thus we will 
undertake an ex position of the eidos which will allow us to cast some light. en 
route, on the material a priori. 
B. THE HUSSERLIAN THEORY OF THE EIDOS49 
As is well known, for H usserl the eidos designates the general essence. But 
what is remarkable in this idea of essence is that it has in H usserl's eyes the 
status of an object.50 It is evident that what is at stake here is an object of a 
totally new type, which we would grasp through a perception of a new type, 
eidetic intuition. What characterizes this perception is the ability to 
apprehend the object in its very ipseity. It is, then, an originary intuition which 
grasps its object in person. We are not going to dwell on the well known 
H usserlian theory of essence. We will try, to the contrary, to grasp in the most 
concrete manner the Husserlian idea of the Eidos. 
We have said that the eidos designates the general essence. Now, this general 
essence is presented in the form of an "invariant"51 which does not change in 
form, that is to say, through all possible variations of an individual empirical 
fact serving to exemplify the general essence.c The consequent eidos is 
disengaged through all the ontic variations of a fact which corresponds, as 
example, to the general essence. Thus, for example, "this red pencil here" 
serves as an example to illustrate the general essence of red. The consciousness 
of the eidos signifies that we are conscious that something is, and that this 
thing is individuated in a contingent fashion in this particular fact there. The 
121 
grasp of the eidos develops on the basis of a free exemplification of the free 
ability to seek the incarnation of the eidos in any individual case. Now, this is 
one of the most well known themes of phenomenology, the eidos, for H usserl, 
has the status of an object, as we have already indicated. How are we to 
comprehend the status of the eidos as object? To do this, it will be necessary to 
properly grasp the sense of this possibility of exemplification implied in the 
idea of general essence, for this possibility is tied to the very idea of object in 
general. The constitution of the eidos as object is inseparably tied to the 
constitution of objects in general in consciousness. 52 The phrase "to grasp the 
eidos as object" signifies the grasping of it as an object which carries along 
with it a horizon of purely ideal possibilities of individuation. 
It is important to comprehend that the essence is not a determination of the 
object. When we consider a color, a green tree for example, we do not direct 
the gaze of consciousness to the object, "this green tree here," but to an ideal 
object, the green in general. Here, though, it is necessary to pay close 
attention: the relation of the individual object serving as example of the ideal 
object is not contingent but necessary. 53 To put it in a different way, at the 
foundation of the intuition of essence, of eidetic intuition, one always 
discovers with essential necessity, immanent necessity,54 sensible intuition. 
Then, let us turn to the side of eidetic intuition and see what a comparison 
with sensible intuition can reveal to us concerning the side of essence. Between 
sensible intuition and eidetic intuition there is, Husserl tells US,55 a radical 
commonality. Both are originary. But at the same time it is possible to assert a 
profound divergence; the reality of essences is in no wayan external reality.56 
That is, eidetic truth does not contain any given reference to the external 
world. Essence does not have ontological existence. Without doubt, it is often, 
as example, the essence of a particular individual factY But then the question 
of its "real" existence in no way enters into consideration. It does not interest 
the phenomenologist because very often this individual fact can be purely 
imaginary. The empirical facts that found eidetic intuition in the 
capacity of examples, include, as well, imaginary facts. Thus the intuition of 
essences in no way presupposes the existence of an other world in which these 
would have real individual existence. The essence, for Husserl, has a purely 
epistemological, non-ontological sense. 58 
We have spoken of eidetic intuition. ~ow, we know that Husserl does not 
speak of eidetic intuition in the Logical Investigations, but of categorial 
intuition. This is the intuition through which we grasp the ideal forms of 
thought (categories, propositions, significations, etc.).59 
N ow, eidetic intuition gives us material essences as, for example, the essence 
of red, of humanity, of memory. Yet the idea of a material essence in Husserl is 
tightly bound to the idea of a material a priori. Let us try, then, to disengage 
the phenomenological sense of the material a priori. 
The material essence is able to make itself known, as example, in an 
122 
individual fact. This possibility of exemplification is the specific character of 
essence in general. Now. this possibility exists prior to individuation, that is to 
say, before eidetic intuition fixing on an individual object, gives it to us in 
person in its ideality as cogitatum. "This table here" represents in the state of 
pure possibility, and prior to its being grasped by consciousness, a material a 
priori. Once "incarnated" in the individual example, it is no longer an a priori 
matter except as the horizon of potentialities implied in the concrete example. 
Ifwe then define the formal a priori as the a priori which reveals the form of 
the object, the material a priori would be the a priori of thefact. if one can say 
this. The material a priori would be the a priori of a fact posited as such. in its 
pure possibility. Likewise, we believe that we are able to advance the 
formulation, with the purpose of clarifying the notion, that the material a 
priori is a possible a posteriori. And, in the idea of a posteriori we have the idea 
of perception, of an originary perception.oo This formulation which we 
propose here may be surprising. It displays, nevertheless, what we have always 
felt in Husserl: the importance of the a posteriori, of the sensible which may 
not be subsumed by the formal. And let us not forget that the intuition of 
essence remains essentially a founded act. 61 
Is it possible, then to assert the primacy of the a posteriori over the a priori? 
Certainly not, if one thinks that the phenomenological method is based 
entirely on eidetic intuition. But what is still significant. nevertheless, is that 
eidetic intuition is founded on nothing but the givens of sensible intuition. The 
a priori delivered by empirical intuition, however, are given as essences.!>2 
From what has gone before it follows that if there is a domain where the a 
priori and the general essence meet and mutually overlap, this domain is that 
of eidetic intuition. As is known, intentional analysis gives results which are 
not concerned with empirical facts, but with essences. And this constitution in 
which the act of giving of the thing itself is performed, has an unconditioned 
and universal validity. Again, we find at the core of the eidetic method the 
constitutive a priori which we encountered in the first part of this exposition. 
Now, 
constitution is 
the characteristic achievement of intentional 
consciousness, that is, of intentionality. But the very essence of intentionality 
is the eidetic necessity which dictates that to each constitutive act corresponds 
necessarily a constituted object. At the heart of the eidetic method of 
phenomenology the two ideas of the a priori and the eidos meet: "Therefore, if 
we think of a phenomenology developed as an intuitively a priori science 
purely according to the eidetic method, all its eidetic researches are nothing 
else but uncoverings of the all-embracing eidos. transcendental ego as such, 
which comprises all pure possibility-variants of my de facto ego and this ego 
itself qua possibility. Eidetic phenomenology, accordingly, explores the 
universal a priori without which neither I nor any transcendental Ego 
whatever is 'imaginable'; or, since every eidetic universality has the value of an 
unbreakable law, eidetic phenomenology explores the all-embracing laws that 
123 
prescribe for every factual statement about something transcendental the 
possible sense (as opposed to the absurdity or inconsistency) of that 
statement. ''63 
We think that we now possess enough rudiments for the attempt to isolate 
the foundation of the relation between the a priori and the eidos. 
C. AN ATTEMPT AT AN EXPLANATION OF THE FOUNDATION OF 
THE A PRIORI-EIDOS RELATION 
To seek the foundation of a relation in general is to examine the possibility 
of this relation. Now, we think that we are able to assert that the 
foundation of the relation between the eidos and the a priori in Husserlian 
thought is this very notion of pure possibility implied by each notion 
separately. But the objection will correctly be raised that a pure possibility 
cannot ever be a foundation. It is necessary, then, that behind this idea of pure 
possibility there lies another idea which would found in its turn the idea of 
the possible. Let us, then, attempt to clarify, in the first place, the notion of 
"pure possibility." 
Possibility, as an idea, is not only implied statically in the H usserlian eidos, 
but dynamically as well. In other words, the eidos ego, for example, implies 
that anyone of the variants of the empirical ego implied by the eidos ego could 
be actualized, could be incarnated in an empirical I, without this 
"presentification," which comes about as example, positing ipso facto an 
empirical I hic et nunc. 
Now, the very possibility of the singularization of one of the variations of 
the transcendental ego is founded on another possibility, that of having the 
example constituted as object as such over against consciousness, an ideal 
object properly understood. This other possibility, to us, is nothing but 
transcendence in the phenomenological sense. In fact, if there is no 
transcendence, possibility remains itself purely possible. It is understandable, 
then, why H usserl insists so on the free possibility of the gaze of consciousness 
to direct itself toward any essence and, reciprocally, to the singular fact 
corresponding to it.64 It is evident, then, that in order for a fact to take on the 
character of an intentional object posited as pure ideality over against the 
consciousness which "constitutes" it, it is necessary that this object transcend 
consciousness while remaining in the immanent sphere of consciousness as 
cogitatum. 65 If this transcendence is not realized, then the pure possibility 
implied by the idea of the eidos remains empty, it loses its sense, for a 
possibility from which one removes the possibility of "expressing itself' ceases 
to be possible. The pure possibility of exemplification remains possible by 
virtue of this same exemplification which, in its turn, is founded on 
transcendence, on constituted transcendence. 
124 
If we turn to the side of the a priori, we observe an analogous situation. Let 
us take, for example, the case of the material a priori which necessarily 
includes all the variations of empirical facts. We could say also that the 
material a priori contains all the facts - all the transcendent beings, in the 
phenomenological sense - which are constituted in the interior of the ego. In 
the same way, the formal a priori contains all the possible forms. empty forms 
par excellence, which are constituted as ideal objects in the interior of 
consciousness. And, in a general way. the universal constitutive a priori 
includes all the objectivities of which the world is comprised, and also includes 
all the beings transcendent to consciousness. This is what led H usserl to say 
that the universal a priori is a concrete a priori.66 
We are then able to say that the eidetic-a priori correlation existing between 
the constituting and the constituted is founded on transcendence. a 
transcendence which is the foundation of the cogitatum. Thus the relation 
cogito-cogitatum qua cogitatum takes on an extraordinary fullness because, 
being situated entirely on the side of the a priori, it includes the infinite field of 
pure eidetic possibilities.67 It is easy, then, to grasp the profound sense of 
Suzanne Bachelard's formulation, namely, that all phenomenology is situated 
in the realm of the a priori. 68 Ultimately, aren't we able to invert the terms and 
to say that the a priori itself is situated within the realm of phenomenology? 
For the a priori which gives its sense to phenomenology is no longer the logical 
a priori, but an a priori which is itself eidos, an eidetic a priori. 
A t the end of this exposition, we again come to the identity of the a priori and 
the eidos, which had served as a point of departure for the investigation which 
we have here undertaken. Are we, however, going to hold to a notion of 
identity with logical resonances? It appears to us, in fact, that we must 
abandon the domain of logic that implies, at its ground, the notion of identity, 
and speak rather of interdependence, of interpenetration of the eidos and of 
the a priori. For the eidos is a priori and the a priori is eidetic since it encloses 
in itself the horizon of pure possibilities, the horizon of all potential 
intentional objects, which is the sense, by definition. of the eidos. 69 
We now comprehend what was said in the introduction of our exposition, 
namely that one does not intend the a priori in the same way in which one intends 
the eidos. Because, if phenomenology studies being and consciousness,70 one 
proceeds from the a priori to the eidos or inversely, depending on whether we 
intend consciousness or being. We thus prefer, in the final analysis, to speak of 
interpenetration and not of identity, a notion which implies a logical 
objectivation of the eidos and the a priori. How is it possible, in effect. to make 
a logical object of this a priori which is "innate"to transcendental subjectivity 
through an eidetic necessity? This interpenetration, which comes about in a 
dynamic manner, is itself sustained by the phenomenological idea of 
transcendence. This signifies ultimately, the arising (surgissement) of being in 
and through consciousness and its becoming aware of itself as SUCh.71 Beca use, 
125 
it should not be forgotten that the transcendental ego, a domain par excellence 
where the a priori structures of the I and of the world are encountered, is itself 
an ego which manifests its own transcendence, this originary transcendence72 
which is responsible for the fact that the transcendental ego, in positing itself, 
at the same time posits immanent transcendence, or better still, constitutes 
that transcendence which becomes a constituted transcendence. 
The eidetic-a priori correlation, then, which displays the correlation of the 
constituting and the constituted becomes a correlation between constitutive 
transcendence and constituted transcendence. Thus phenomenology, as the 
eidetic a priori investigation of the ego and of the world, appears entirely to 
follow the guiding thread of transcendence. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
'''possible.'' This word is present in the original German text, and in the French 
version of Levinas, but not in Cairns' English rendition. 
b"objectites." A French neologism. intended to translate "Gegenstiindlichkeit" or 
"object for consciousness." 
cHere she is following the work of A. De Muralt, L'idee de la phenomenologle: 
L'exemplarisme husserlien (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 1958): in 
English as The Idea of Phenomenology: Husserlian Exemplarism, trans. G.L. 
Breckon (Evanston; Northwestern University Press, 1974). 
NOTES TO THE TEXT 
All quotes from Husser! are given here in the accepted English translations except 
for those from Ideen I and Phiinomenologische Psycho logie, which we have translated 
ourselves. 
I. FTL, E - p. 248, F - p. 332 n. (a), G - p. 255. 
2. " ... Phenomenological explication makes clear what is included and only non-
intuitively co-intended in the sense of the cogitatum (for example, the 'other 
side'), by making present in phantasy the potential perceptions that would make 
the invisible visible." CM, E - p. 48, F - p. 41, G - p. 85. 
3. Husser!, Ms. F I 28, S. 298-99 (SS 1920), cited by Iso Kern, Husserl und Kant 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964), p. 56. 
4. In the usual philosophical sense, the a priori designates that which is not 
chronologically, but logically prior. Kant, in the introduction to the second 
edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, stresses the fact that the notion of the a 
priori indicates in general that which is independent of experience and even of all 
sense impressions. But a principle which is itself based on experience cannot be 
called a priori. It is not only necessary that a knowledge not be derived from an 
experience, but that it is also absolutely independent of all experience (Kr. d. r. 
V. B 2-3). Max Scheler gives a phenomenological definition of the a priori: the a 
priori designates all the ideal unities of signification and the propositions which 
are given in person by an immediate intuition, without implying the position of 
the existence of a subjectivity which would think them, nor the existence of an 
126 
object to which they would apply. See Der Forrnalisl11us in der Ethik und die 
rnateriale Wertethik (Bern: Francke Yerlag. 1954), p. 68. The H usserlian 
influence in the thought of Scheler is felt, because, as Iso Kern indicates (p. 57), 
for Husserl the a priori designates principally that which is independent of all 
psychological subjectivity. Cf. equally the Prolegomena. H usserl posits the a 
priori conditions of knowledge as being the conditioned "which can be discussed 
and investigated apart from all relation to the thinking subject and to the Idea of 
Subjectivity in science. L/, Prolegomena. E 
p. 233, F- p. 259, G 
p. 238. 
5. FTL, E - p. 246, F - p. 330, G - p. 218. 
6. Ibid" E - p. 249, F 
p. 334, G - p. 108. 
7. Ibid., E - p. 248, F - p. 332, G - p. 220. Let us draw attention equally to the 
Cartesian Meditations where Husserl speaks of an "ontological" a priori tied to 
the idea of the a priori constitution of the world, a formulation which signifies 
the elucidation of the a priori of the universal structure of the world. elf, E 
p. 137. F 
p. 116, G 
p. 164. 
8. FTL, E - p. 251, F p. 335, G -- p. 222. 
9. PL, E - p. 28, G - p. 28. 
10. " ... such expressions as 'essential necessity' and 'essentially determined' forced 
themselves upon us 
phrases in which a definite concept of the Apriori. first 
clarified and delimited by phenomenology, receives expressions." eM. E - p.69. 
F - p. 59, G 
p. 103. Cf. also PL, E - p. 27. G - p. 27. In the Prolegomena Husserl 
posits a priori laws as being laws that would be under the jurisdiction of theory 
as such, that is to say, under the general essence of the ideal unities which 
constitute the theory of science. Ll. Prolegomena. E - p. 233. F pp. 258-59. G 
p. 238. 
II. The conjunction of the a priori and the formal was brought about in Kantian 
critique. Let us here recall that this identification of the a priori and the formal 
was vigorously criticized by Scheler. who saw in this a fundamental error in the 
Kantian system. Scheler, p. 74. 
12. In paragraph 65 of the Prolegomena Husserl considers the ideal conditions 
which make possible.a theory in generaL He is thus led to distinguish the ideal 
noetic conditions (founded a priori on the idea of consciousness as such) and the 
purely logical ideal conditions founded purely on the "content" 
of 
consciousness, a content which is itself properly understood as a priori. 
13. Rene Scherer, La phenomenologie des "recherches logiques" de Husserl (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1967), p. 254. Our translation. "The notion of 
directed glance (visee, ahzielen), intention or act has already been admitted 
without further examination. It was, in effect, sufficient for the advancement of 
the preceding Investigations to establish a general distinction between the real 
content of consciousness. its real parts or its lived content ("CClI). and its 
intentional content, irreal or ideal in the sense of signification, and, again, the 
real in the sense of the actually existing object. It was sufficient to free the 
concept of consciousness from its psychological interpretation which would 
red uce consciousness to a web of psychic events, rendering incomprehensible the 
domain of ideality and the objective laws which govern it. This was an ascendent 
step: it led toward the formal a priori or generally, that of abstract ideality." 
14 LI. Prolegomena, E - p. 233. F -- p. 258, G - p. 238. 
15. As Quentin Lauer remarks in Husserl's Philosophie comme science rigoureuse 
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1955), notes pp. 154-163, even the 
content of the science is a priori. "It is 'constituted' as given in the intentionality 
of consciousness, which constitutes the objectivity ofthe formal and the material 
127 
sides, which makes it still more radically constitutive than the formal a priori of 
Kant." Our translation. All the notes in the original edition are not in the English 
translation, Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy, trans. Quentin Lauer 
(New York: Harper and Row, 1965). 
16. This is the sense of the principle which H usserl sets forth in the Formal and 
Transcendental Logic: "To every operational law of the theory of forms there 
corresponds a priori a subjective law concerning constitutive subjectivity." E-
p. 182, F - p. 247, G - p. 162. 
17. "The subjective structures in question in the already described inquiries of a 
logic directed to the subjective has a congruity with the corresponding concepts 
pertaining to the theory of objective logic which is obviously not a matter of 
accidental psychological fact. They indicate an Apriori which is perfectly 
correlated with the Objective Apriori." FTL, E - p. 182, F - p. 246, G - p. 162. 
18. Scherer, p. 58. "It is a question of unveiling the hidden lived-experiences (les 
vecues) which are in correlation with the idealities defined in the first four 
Investigations. A displacement of interest is witnessed, and the theme ofthe last 
Investigation will properly be the uncovering of the acts by which the subject 
grasps these idealities, through which it becomes conscious of idealities." 
Scherer, p. 57. Our translation. 
19. The formal, then, requires the "placing into brackets" of the empirical, of the 
psychic. But at the same time the formal obliges us to turn to the side of a no 
longer psychological, but constitutive subjectivity. " ... in return," writes 
Scherer, "what has awakened us to the idea of a possible indifference with regard 
to subjectivity, can be thought a priori as an object of a possible subjective 
knowledge; this turnabout leads to the idea of a treatment of the subjective act, 
not as a simple fact, but as pure possibility." Scherer, p. 56. Our translation. And 
he cites in support of this "conversion toward the subjective" the same text in 
which Husserl posits in explicit terms the correlation between ideal objects and 
constituting SUbjectivity: "Now although it was made evident," wrote Husserl, 
"that ideal objects, in spite of the fact that they are formed in consciousness, have 
their own being, being-in-themselves, there is nonetheless an important task 
here which has never seriously been seen nor embarked upon: the task, namely, 
of making this peculiar correlation bl:tween ideal objects of the purely logical 
sphere, and subjective psychic experiences as forming activity into a theme for 
research." Phiinomenologische Psychologie (PP), p. 26, cited in Scherer, p. 57. 
20. S. Bachelard comments that the phenomenological method is purely intuitive, 
for it aims at the uncovering of the profound sense of the world and of human 
being. Now, it is through this revelation that the idea of the a priori actively 
emerges. "But, this uncovering makes apparent the essences which call attention 
to the a priori structures. And these a priori structures are revealed not only in 
the objective world, but also in constituting SUbjectivity. This objective a priori 
cannot be 'philosophically intelligible' a priori unless it is referred precisely to 
the ultimate sources of intelligibility, that is to say, to the essential necessity 
which governs the transcendental sphere. To comprehend the world, it is 
necessary to lay bare the essential laws which determine the manner in which the 
objective world plunges its roots into transcendental subjectivity; in short, it is 
necessary to lay bare the subjective a priori. This a priori governs the set of the 
constitutive functions of the ego." S. Bachelard, La logique de Husserl (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1957), p. 265. Our translation. In English as A 
Study of Husserl's Logic. trans. L. Embree (Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press, 1968). 
128 
21. ". . . to grasp in particular the already described relatedness of every 
straightforwardly derived Apriori to the antecedent Apriori of its constitution; 
accordingly, to understand also the a priori apprehensibility of the correlation 
between object and constitutive consciousness." FTL, E ~ p. 249, F ~ p. 334, G ~ 
p.220. 
22. "Now it is clear: Only by the aforesaid uncovering of the performance that 
constitutes the being sense of the given world can we avoid every c.ountersensical 
absolutizing of this world's being and know, universally and in every respect, 
what we (as philosophers) are allowed to assign to that sense .... " FTL, E ~ 
pp. 243-44, F ~ p. 362, G - p. 215. 
23. Ibid., E ~ p. 165, F ~ p. 224, G ~ p. 147. 
24. APS, p. 213. 
25. Ibid. 
26. Ibid. 
27. Ibid., p. 218. "The great theme of transcendental philosophy is consciousness in 
general as a hierarchical structure of constitutive performances in which ever 
new levels or layers of ever new objectivities . .. are constituted." Our 
translation. 
28. FTL, E ~ p. 276, F ~ p. 367, G ~ p. 244. 
29. "Any 'objective' object, any object whatever (even an immanent one), points to a 
structure, within the transcendental ego, that is governed by a rule. As 
something the ego objectivates, something of which he is conscious in any 
manner, the object indicates forthwith an universal rule governing possible 
other consciousnesses of it as identical - possible, as exemplifying essentially 
predelineated types. And naturally the same is true of any 'imaginable' object, 
anything conceivable as something intended. Transcendental subjectivity is not 
a chaos of intentional processes. Moreover, it is not a chaos of types of 
constitution, each organized in itself by its relation to a kind or a form of 
intentional objects. In other words: the all ness of objects and types of objects 
conceivable for me - transcendentally speaking; for me as transcendental ego ~ 
is no chaos: and correlatively the allness of the types of the infinite multiplicities, 
the types corresponding to types of objects, is not a chaos either: noetically those 
multiplicities always belong together, in respect of their possible synthesis. 
That indicates in advance a universal constitutive synthesis, in which 
therefore all actual and possible objectivities (as actual and possible for the 
transcendental ego), and correlatively all actual and possible modes of 
consciousness of them, are embraced." We quote the whole passage. eM, E --
pp. 53-54, F ~ p. 46, G - p. 90. 
30. FTL, E ~ p. 292, F ~ p. 387, G ~ p. 257. 
31. Scherer, pp. 350-51. "If, now," writes Scherer, "we define empiricism not as a 
radicalism diverted from its project while maintaining a fertile idea of reduction, 
but as an a posteriorism, and we contrast it to a rationalism founded on the 
position of an a priori, then phenomenology reveals to us lived-experience 
(vecu) as the ultimate a priori, the source of all rationality. Because it is the 
constant return to lived-through-experience which allows the rational 
elucidation of experience, opening to us the access to the unity of its origin and 
that, as H usserl correctly said, prior to all theory of experience, it was a question 
of the presence of animate beings acting in a natural environment. Before, that is 
to say, originarily, and it is for this reason that we weigh the lived-through-
experience, and that alone it is able to deliver itself to us if we elucidate it as it is, 
in its universal a priori." Our translation. 
129 
32. Scherer. p. 342. 
33. Kern. pp. 60-61. 
34. Experience in the phenomenological sense is evidence. and evidence is the 
fundamental character of intentionality Cf. eM. E - pp. 57-58. F .- p. 49. G-
p. 93. See also FTL E 
p. 233. F 
p. 312. G - p. 206: "Experience is the 
performance in which for me. the experiencer, experienced being 'is there,' and is 
there as it is. with the whole content and the mode of being that experience itself. 
by the performance going on in its intentionality. attributes to it. .. 
35. Scherer. p. 351. 
36. eM. E p. 74. F - p. 62. G - p. 108. 
37. Ibid .. E - p. 71. F - p. 60. G - p. 105. 
38. " ... that nothing exists for me otherwise than by virtue of the actual and 
potential performance of my own consciousness." FTL. E - p. 234. F - p. 314. G 
- p. 207. " ... in my intentionality it is legitimated. it receives its content and its 
being-sense. Naturally the world for everyone presupposes that. in my ego - the 
ego who says. with the universality in question here. ego cogito, and included in 
his actual and possible cogitata everything actual and possible for him .... " 
FTL, E - p. 237, F- p. 318. G - p. 210. 
39. "It concerns the essence of subjectivity in general. which is unveiled through the 
examples, but in a purely possible generality. It is a priori because it passes from 
the fact of a thought to the thinkable. to the unconditioned." Scherer, p. 66. Our 
transla ti on. 
40. Ibid., pp. 353-54. 
41. eM, E - p. 137, F - p. 116, G - p. 164. "Tracing the essence of such constitution 
and its ego logical levels, we made visible an Apriori of a completely novel kind, 
namely the Apriori of constitution. We learned to distinguish, on the one hand, 
the self-constitution of the ego for himself and in his primordial own-
essentialness and. on the other hand, the constitution of all the aliennesses of 
various levels, by virtue of sources belonging to his own essentialness. There 
resulted the all-embracing unity of the essential for belonging to the total 
constitution accomplished in my own ego - the constitution as whose correlate 
the Objective existing world, for me and for any ego whatever, is continually 
given beforehand, and goes on being shaped in its sense-strata, with a correlative 
Apriori form style. And this constitution is itself an Apriori." 
42. Ibid., E - p. 137, F - p. 116, G - p. 164. 
43. FTL, E - p. 246, F - p. 330, G - p. 218. 
44. Ibid., E - pp. 246-47. F - p. 330, G - p. 218. 
45. Ibid. 
46. "In this inquiry. the variation ofthe necessary initial example is the performance 
in which the 'eidos' should emerge and by means of which the evidence of the 
indissoluble eidetic correlation between constitution and constituted should 
also emerge." FTL. E - p. 247. F - p. 331, G - p. 219. 
47. This correlation is nothing but the noetic-noematic correlation. the cogito and 
the cogitatum qua cogitatum. Cf. FTL, E - p. 262, F - p. 349, G .. p. 231. 
4X. "It thus becomes evident that an ontic Apriori is possible. as a concretely full 
possibility, only as the correlate of a constitutional Apriori that is concretely 
united with it. concretely inseparable from it." FTL. E - p. 248, F - p. 333, G-
p. 220. We understand here in what sense it is necessary to comprehend the 
concrete a priori to which Husserl so often refers. The concrete a priori 
designates the concrete unity of the ontic a priori and the constitutive a priori. 
49. The Husserlian theory of essence is expounded in paragraphs 1-16 of Ideas. We 
130 
are referring here to the work of Iso Kern, Husserl und Kant, pp. 55-62. Cf. also 
E. Levinas, La tMorie de I'intuition dans fa phenomenofogie de Husserl (Paris: 
Felix Alcan, 
1930), pp. 142-174; Eng. trans. A Orianne (Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1973). 
50. "The essence (eidos) is a new kind of object. Just as the given of individual or 
experiencing intuition is an individual object, the given of eidetic intuition is a 
pure essence." Our translation. Ideas, E - p. 49, F - p. 21, G 
p. 14 (pp. 10-11 in 
1913 ed.) 
51. "But, precisely with this coinciding, what necessarily persists throughout this 
free and always-repeatable variation comes to the fore: the invariant, the 
indissoluble identical in the different and ever again different, the essence 
common to all, the universal essence by which all 'imaginable' variants of the 
example, and all variants of any such variant, are restricted. This invariant is the 
ontic essential form (a priori form), the eidos, corresponding to the example. in 
place of which any variant of the example could have served equally well." FTL, 
E - p. 248. F - p. 332. G 
p. 219. 
52. APS, Beilage XVII, p. 403. 
53. This is what Levinas shows very clearly in La theorie de I'intuition. 'The 
individual object," he writes, "is an indispensable base for the perception of 
essence. The mode of existence of the ideal object directs us, in some way, to the 
individual object, implying a relation to it. But the existence of the individual 
object does not play the role of a premise in eidetic knowledge. It is independent 
of the 'actuality' of the individual objects," p. 156. 
54. APS, p. 213. 
55. "Presented here is not a mere external analogy but, rather, a radical 
commonality. Also, eidetic intuition is an intuition, just as the eidetic object is an 
object. The generalization of the concepts 'intuition' and 'object,' which belong 
together correlatively is not an arbitrary idea. but, rather. is one compellingly 
required by the nature of things (Sachen)." Our translation. Ideas. E - p. 49. F 
pp. 21-22, G - pp. 14-15 (p. II in 1913 ed.). 
56. " ... the intuitive grasping and positing of essences does not in the least imply the 
positing of an individual existent; pure eidetic truths do not in the least contain 
assertions concerning facts. Therefore. one cannot infer from eidetic truths 
alone any truths concerning facts." Our translation. Ideas. E - p. 51. F - p. 25, G 
- p. 17 (p. 13 in 1913 ed.). 
57. " ... as a result, no eidetic intuition is possible without the free possibility of 
turning one's regard to a 'corresponding' individual and becoming conscious of 
it as example - just as, conversely. no intuition of an individual is possible 
without the free possibility of performing ideation and by this directing the 
regard to the essence which is exemplified in the individual seen. However, this 
does not alter the fact that both kinds of intuition are in principle different." Our 
translation. Ideas, E - p. 50, F - p. 23. G - pp. 15-16 (2. 12 in 1913 ed.). 
5X. Ricoeur remarks quite correctly that essence is the pure signification which is 
fulfilled in eidetic intuition. Ideas, F - p. 18, n. 5. Essence is thus the correlate of 
each individual fact. 
59. In the sixth Logical Investigation, Husserl identifies the essence and the general. 
Categorial intuition which grasps the general is an act founded on empirical 
intuition; thus is constituted a new sphere of objectivities "given in themselves 
and sustained by fundamental acts." Our translation. 
60. "The material a priori," writes M. Dufrenne. "is not material solely through its 
content, but also according to its mode of presence." La notion d'a priori(Paris: 
131 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1959), p. 107; Eng. trans. E.S. Casey 
(Evanston: Northwestern II niversity Press, 1966). 
61. See L/, E - p. 792 (Vol. II, paragraph 48), F - p. 136 (Tome 3), G - p. 152 (Band 
HI). "Categorical acts are characterized as founded acts." 
62. "Eidetic intuition could not be a criterion for the a priori, their evidence is not 
primarily logical, it is first of all sensuous." Dufrenne, p. 118. Our translation. 
63. eM, E -- pp. 71-72, F - pp. 60-61, G - pp. 105-06. 
64. Ideas, E - p. 50, F - p. 23, G - p. 16 (p. 12 in 1913 ed.). 
65. eM, E .- pp. 83-84, F - p. 70, G - p. 117. 
66. Here it is necessary to understand the concrete a priori in the sense of the 
universal concrete life of the transcendental ego. We then see that Husserl 
entirely constituted an a priori system distinguishing within the a priori different 
levels. We pass, in effect, from the a priori of sensible intuition, which is the a 
priori of nature which surrounds us, to the constitutive a priori, that is to say, to 
the a priori of phenomenon, finally arriving at the higher level, the a priori of 
idealizing acts. Cf. eM, E - p. 146, F - p. 125, G - p. 173. 
67. It is in the fourth Meditation that this idea of pure possibilities enclosed in the 
transcendental ego, itself a pure possibility, is thrown into relief: "To me as the 
meditating ego, guided by the idea of a philosophy as the all-embracing science, 
grounded with absolute strictness, a science I took as a tentative basis, it 
becomes evident after these last considerations that, first of all, I must develop a 
purely eidetic phenomenology and that in the latter alone the first actualization 
of a philosophical science - the actualization of a 'first philosophy' - takes place 
or can take place. After transcendental reduction, my true interest is direct to my 
pure ego, to the uncovering of this de facto ego. But the uncovering can become 
genuinely scientific, only if I go back to the apodictic principles that pertain to 
this ego as exemplifying the eidos ego: the essential universalities and necessities 
by means of which the fact is to be related to its rational grounds (those of pure 
possibility) and thus made scientific (logical). It should be noted that, in the 
transition from my ego to an ego as such, neither the actuality nor the possibility 
of other egos is presupposed. I phantasy only myself as if I were otherwise; I do 
not phantasy others. In itself, then, the science of pure possibilities precedes the 
science of actualities and alone makes it possible as a science. With this we attain 
the methodological insight that, alone with phenomenological reduction, eidetic 
intuition is the fundamental form of all particular transcendental methods (that 
both of them determine, through and through, the legitimate sense of a 
transcendental phenomenology)." eM, E - p. 72, F - p. 61, G-p. 106. We quote 
the whole paragraph. 
68. Bachelard, p. 265. 
69. "The 'phenomenological self-explication' that went on in my ego, this 
explication of all my ego's constitutings and all the objectivities existing for him, 
necessarily assumed the methodic form of an a priori self-explication, one that 
gives the facts their place in the corresponding universe of pure (or eidetic) 
possibilities." eM, E - p. 84, F - p. 71, G - p. 117. 
70. Ibid., E - p. 88, F - p. 74, G - pp. 120-21. 
71. Thus is realized what Husserl called the " ... 'unfolding' of the universal Logos 
of all conceivable being." eM, E - p. ISS, F - p. 132, G - p. 181. 
72. Ideas, E - p. 157, F - p. 190, G - p. 138 (pp. 109-110 in 1913 ed.). 
73. eM, E-pp. 83-84, F -pp. 70-71, G -pp. 116-17. "Transcendency in every form is 
an immanent existential characteristic, constituted within the ego." 
REGIONS OF BEING AND REGIONAL ONTOLOGIES IN 
HUSSERL'S PHENOMENOLOGY* 
LUDWIG LANDGREBE 
The question of the "constitution [Aujbau] of the world," understood for a 
long time as exclusively concerning its physical, scientifically determinable 
structure, has gained a more general and comprehensive meaning in 
philosophical thought in the last few decades. It has developed into the 
question of the multiplicity of entities, their kinds and corresponding 
categories, and the relationship of these kinds to one another. Thus, Nicolai 
Hartmann's attempt to understand this relationship as one of layers of Being" 
built up upon one another has received considerable approval. Husserl's 
theory of the regions of Being has a special significance in the development of 
this problematic, not only because it was the historical starting point for this 
whole development, but above all because it allowed the methodical 
presuppositions, in accordance with which one can make distinctions of 
kinds, regions or strata of what exists, to be seen with exceptional clarity. 
Thus the justification and limits of such an attempt can be shown by critically 
discussing this theory. 
The development of H usserl's phenomenology is connected with a counter-
movement against the naturalism that dominated the end of the nineteenth 
century. For this naturalism there was only one mode of Being, that of the 
"objective," precisely and scientifically determinable object, and only one kind 
of law governing the connections between existents, namely the causal 
lawfulness of natural interconnection. For logic, the foundations of which 
Husserl investigated in his earliest works, this meant psychologism.b 
Psychologism denied the specific character of objects of thought and their 
laws. It interpreted the objects of thought as psychic facts, and their lawful 
connection as a causal connection between the occurrences of psychic facts, a 
connection regulated' by natural laws. In his critique of this conception, 
Husserl showed that Being must be spoken of in different ways, that not all 
Being is Being in the sense of the objects of natural-scientific determination, 
*Translated by William McKenna from Ludwig Landgrebe. "Seinsregionen und 
regionale Ontologien in Husserls Phiinomenologie," in Der Weg der Phiinomeno!ogie, 
2nd ed. (Giitersloh: Gerd Mohn, 1967); originally published in Studium generate, ix;' 6 
(1956), pp. 313-24. 
132 
133 
objects ultimately given by the senses. Rather, there are "objects of a higher 
order," among which must be included the objects of logic. Thus, in his 
earliest investigations, Husserl had already broken with the principle of a 
philosophical interpretation of the world oriented exclusively toward the 
model of being represented by the objects of natural science. 
This insight had a further consequence: The Being of natural objects is 
related to sensory intuition, in which such objects are ultimately given and by 
means of which all concepts of such objects ultimately have to be verified. 
Now if this kind of objectivity is not the only one, but there are objects of 
another kind, of a higher order, then there must also be a corresponding 
intuition for them. For the distinction between a merely empty presenting, a 
reproduction, an empty, merely verbal meaning, and self-presence, along with 
the consciousness of self-givenness which corresponds to it, holds for 0 bjects. 
Thus the concept of intuition must be broadened and specified: to every kind 
of object there corresponds an appropriate way for it to be "itself there" 
["selbst da'1 for our consciousness, as distinct from merely being meant and 
given in a more or less intuitive, reproductive consciousness. Every such 
consciousness of something being itself there, of the self-given ness of an 
object, can be called intuition in an extended sense of that term. For objects of 
thought, this consciousness of self-presence is called "categorial intuition," 
to make clear the distinction between how an object of thought, a state of 
affairs, can be merely "meant" in a mere repetition of words, and how it can be 
made an object of insightful consciousness. 
When we consider the way in which we become cognizant of such 
differences among entities as distinctions pertaining to the objects of our 
consciousness, we see that this cognizance cannot be gained simply from 
experience [Erfahrung]. For experience, as consciousness of the givenness of a 
diversity among entities, presupposes a point of view from which entities can 
be comprehended as alike and comparable and can be distinguished from 
entities of another sort. It would not be possible to examine entities on the 
basis of their similarities and differences, if they did not already offer 
themselves as alike in a certain respect and different in another. This is 
presupposed if entities we experience are to become objects of a science. 
H usserl proceeds, therefore, from the fact that the world of our experience has 
become an object of scientific determination along many lines, a process in 
which what everyday experience offers vaguely and incidentally is connected 
and conceptualized precisely. Each science has its province as a totality of 
objects of experience; however, it does not present this province to itself. 
Rather, the province is given to it beforehand, in so far as what exists is 
presented in experience with this structure of comparableness and 
distinguished ness. This structure precedes a priori the empirical science and 
delimits the domain of its inquiry. Considering the unitary and homogeneous 
char<lcter which allows objects to make up the province of a science, Husserl 
134 
designated the totality of objects of any possible experiential science a region. 
The common characteristics of the objects of a region, which are essential 
for their having become objects of that region in the first place, are contained 
in the categories of the region in question. These are the fundamental concepts 
of the region. They capture and express the a priori presuppositions under 
which a manifold of experienced entities can be apprehended as so belonging 
together as to be able to become the theme of a science. Because they 
constitute the specific ontological constitution [Seinsver{assung], i.e., the 
objective-character, of the objects of a science, Husserl called the philosophi-
cal disciplines which develop the categories of anyone of these regions 
regional ontologies. Thus a regional ontology provides the foundation for 
each empirical science, since it explicates the basic concepts of a science. Of 
course, this should not be taken to mean that such regional ontologies could 
be delineated prior to all empirical science. Rather, they become outlined 
on the basis of subsequent reflection on the conditions under which the 
delimitation of any province can and has come about. These ontologies 
explicate what must belong to an object with unconditioned generality and 
necessity in order for it to become an object of any determinate science, that is, 
its essential structure. Thus, Husser! also called these ontologies eidetic 
sciences in contrast to the empirical, factual sciences. The essential make-up of 
an entity of a given province precedes, in itself, its factual determination in 
experience and in an empirical science, although, of course, the discovery of 
this essential make-up only comes afterwards. 
Husser! made this relationship between factual and eidetic sciences clear to 
himself, at first, by means of the relation between the Euclidean geometry of 
three dimensional spatial forms and the empirical investigation of spatial 
forms. The figures of Euclidean geometry are not the kind ofthings that can be 
discovered by means of abstraction and comparison of empirically given 
spatial forms, rather they are projected as ideal figures and proportions in 
accordance with which empirically given spatial forms can be understood. 
They explicate what belongs universally and necessarily to the triangle, etc., as 
such, and indicate how to subsume empirically given figures under this 
concept. Husserl further inferred: wherever a multiplicity of objects is so given 
that they can become the unified province of a scientific investigation, one 
marked off from other provinces, then likewise one must be able to discover 
an essential structure by which this unity is determined and which can be 
expressed by the basic regional concepts of this province. Furthermore, for 
every kind of objective existent there must correspond a way in which it is 
itself given, an intuition in the extended sense mentioned above. 
Above the regional ontologies, which specifically explicate the basic 
concepts and the essential make-up of a definite province of objects which can 
become the theme of a science, stands formal ontology, which disregards all 
regional distinctions between objects, their specific material determination, 
135 
and only examines them with respect to their being objects of thought in 
genera!. It has as its object of inquiry the conditions under which anything can 
become an object of thought, can be held in thought and explicated. The basic 
concept of formal ontology is thus thf: empty "anything whatever" [Hetwas 
uberhaupt'1, the object of thought in general, anything that can be 
conceptually grasped and determined. Formal ontology sets forth the 
conditions for thinking of objects in general, objects of any sort. Thus it is a 
part of logic taken as universal analytics. To distinguish them from formal 
ontology, Husserl also called the regional ontologies "material ontologies." 
Thus far we have dealt with the general program of a distinction of regions 
of being as regions of objects and the ontologies corresponding to them that 
was developed by Husserl already in the first volume of his Ideen zu einer 
reinen Phiinomenoiogie und phiinomenoiogischen Philosophie (1912-1913). d 
One should notice here that an essential preliminary decision is already 
present in this program, and the presuppositions under which the distinction 
of regions of being gains its sense for Husserl are visible. The distinction 
between kinds of being and between their corresponding regions is obtained 
by reflecting on the conditions under which the entities we encounter have 
already become objects of the many sciences relating to them, on the a priori 
presuppositions of the scientific thematization of the world. But this 
distinction is more than just a problem for scientific theory. For today, the 
world also appears to non-scientific and prescientific consciousness in the 
light of the interpretation which was given to it by many centuries of scientific 
work. Thus the inquiry into the regions of being, into the origin of these 
regional distinctions, and into the justification for these distinctions is, at the 
same time, an inquiry into the perspectives and prejudices according to which 
things which exist in the world appear so obviously to us today to be dividable 
and distinct from one another. 
The reflection on the conditions under which entities are set off as a possible 
province of a science is a reflection on how they become objects for 
consciousness in such a way that such a demarcation is possible. Thus Being, 
in respect to the consciousness for which it becomes an object, is considered as 
being-an-object-for-consciousness [Gegenstand-Sein fiir das BewusstseinJ. 
The question is: how does an object come to givenness, and perhaps to 
self-givenness, to that consciousness of self-givenness which in general is 
designated intuition by Husser!' Thus the differentiation of regions of Being 
does not arise through a simple description of entities and their 
differences, but only through a description that considers the correlation 
between what is given and the manner in which it is given to consciousness. In 
this sense Husserl speaks ofthe constitution of an entity, meaning not simply 
its inner structure, but its way of appearing to the consciousness which is 
directed to it and has it as an object. The investigation of the different regions 
of being thus becomes for him an investigation of constitutions: One must 
136 
inquire back from every type of object, in whatever way experience may 
already have differentiated it, and however on that basis it may have become 
an object of a science, to the mode of consciousness which corresponds to it and 
is in accordance with it. In general, whatever object, along with its essential 
regional or material structure, is being considered, the corresponding mode of 
consciousness in which such an object can be itself given, intuited, and which 
necessarily belongs to it, is to be investigated. This is above all a purely 
methodological concept of constitution, one which points to the task of 
searching for that consciousness corresponding to each region of being which 
gives the entities of that region themselves. In other words, this is the task of 
searching for the only legitimating "intuition" for all concepts pertaining to 
such an entity, an intuition in which it becomes evident that there "is" 
something of that kind at all. 
I t should be noted, therefore, that talk of regions of Being receives its sense 
only in the light of this essentially necessary correlation with the modes of 
consciousness in which an entity of any region is given, and that there could be 
no other way to justify making such distinctions of regions of Being, if these 
distinctions are to be anything other than generalizations of concepts already 
acquired empirically. It is in this sense that Husserl develops the inquiry into 
the regions of Being as a transcendental philosophical inquiry, as an inquiry 
into the necessary correlation of Being and consciousness, and this means into 
the constitution of Being for consciousness. So understood, this inquiry is 
prior to any metaphysical decision that would interpret this relationship in an 
idealistic or realistic sense. 
In recent Husser) interpretation/ it has been repeatedly pointed out that this 
methodological sense of the concept of constitution must be sharply 
distinguished from its idealistic interpretation, although it is true that, from 
the beginning, Husserl did not clearly make this distinction. Rather, it seems 
that the methodological concept of constitution is tinged with an idealistic 
sense. This can be seen already in the first volume of Ideen, where, from the 
very beginning, constitution, as an achievement [Leistung] of consciousness, 
does not merely signify making an entity appear for consciousness, but rather 
signifies "world creation," as a creation of Being through the positing 
performances [Leistungen] of consciousness. l As a result, whatever exists, 
that is not itself consciousness, acquires the character of being something 
"merely" constituted, in contrast to what does the constituting itself, absolute 
consciousness. The latter is designated as a superior region, as the region of 
pure consciousness for which everything is what it is in such a way that it only 
has Being by virtue of the "grace" of consciousness. Thus consciousness itself 
is raised to the status of absolute existent.g Clearly, one can speak of a "region" 
of pure consciousness only in an inauthentic sense. For this region of 
constituting Being cannot be compared with any of the regions of constituted 
Being. Reference to consciousness as a region acquires its sense, however, 
137 
from Husserl's intention to designate the "province" of transcendental 
phenomenology (region understood as the province of possible scientific 
inquiry) and to distinguish it from the province of non-philosophical sciences. 
The task now is to trace how Husserl sought to carry out this program of the 
constitution of the regions of being in the second volume of Ideen, h which was 
also [as was Ideen I, trans.] written in 1912, but only published in 1952 from 
the manuscripts H usserlleft behind. Once the motive for the transition from a 
methodological to a metaphysical concept of constitution is seen, it will 
become apparent that this cannot possibly be a smooth transition. Rather it 
leads to a conflict, which, although not resolved by Husserl himself, can 
indicate, precisely by being unresolved, the direction in which the inquiry into 
the "constitution of the world" must be continued. 
At first glance, the constitutive construction, as it is presented in Ideen II, 
seems to correspond completely to a traditional schema. The three sections, 
the constitution of material nature, the constitution of animate nature, and 
the constitution of the spiritual [geistigen] world, seem to refer to three 
distinct regions which are strata of being built on one another. The basic types 
of sciences, then, correspond to the three regions: the science of material nature 
(mathematical natural science), biology and the natural science of psychology 
(psychophysics), and the humanistic sciences [GeisteswissenschaJten] in the 
widest sense. Each of these regions has its basic regional concept which 
provides the "clue" [Leiifaden] for the exhibition of its constitution. For 
material nature this is the concept physical thing, the "mere thing" or res 
extensa, which can be determined in a purely quantitative and causal manner; 
for animate nature it is the concept of animated, embodied [leibkorperlichen] 
creature; for the spiritual world, the concept of spirit [Geistes], understood as 
the personal I [Ich] and its personal achievements, those on the basis of which 
things that are experienced appear as having "predicates of value," as being 
laden with significational characters, as useful things, works of art, etc. While 
causality is the fundamental law of the connection of occurrences in material 
and animal nature, the law of motivation governs the spiritual world. This is a 
law which, as an intentional relation of the personal ego to his surrounding 
world, must in principle be distinguished from causality. 
From this it seems to be readily intelligible in what sense material nature is 
to be regarded as the undermost stratum in the structure [Aujbau] of the 
world. All life-processes could only be given as processes on and in a lived 
body [Leib] in so far as it is a material body. Psychic processes in particular 
could be localized as mental processes [Erlebnisse] of the very human being 
who here and now occupies his spatio-temporal place in the world of extended 
things. Likewise all personal acts and modes of behaviour can only appear as 
belonging to a creature who appears by means of a lived body, and all 
significational characters require a substrate that can be sensuously perceived, 
that is, a material thing. Thus, entities of both upper regions are founded 
138 
objectivities of a higher order, which, as such, are not given through the 
senses. Rather, these objectivities, as psychic occurrences, are given originally 
by means of "empathic projection" into a sensuously present body 
[Leibkorper], or, as significational characters, they have their origin in the 
activities of persons, such as those, for example, through which a material 
thing receives its character of "useful-for," or of being a tool, etc. It is in this 
sense that material nature has a constitutive priority. It is the material thing 
which is the "primal object" [Urgegenstand], graspable in pure and simple 
sensory perception. 
Thus an order in the founding relationships that exist between the regions of 
being is ascertained by reflecting on the way in which the entities of the 
respective regions are given, and, essentially, the only way they can be given. 
But once this reflection is carried out, it becomes apparent that the relation 
between the regions is not simply one of strata of Being built upon 
one another. 
Rather, 
the strata "interpenetrate" in a manner 
which makes the imagery of strata appear totally inadequate or appropriate 
only under specific conditions. In order to understand the nature of this 
interpenetration, we must first consider more closely how something shows 
itself as a real [wirklich], material, spatio-corporeal thing, i.e., how it is 
intuited as itself-given. It is necessarily given in perspectives, "adumbrations," 
in whose change it appears as one and the same, as identical with itself. This 
distinguishes the real thing from the phantom, which, in the attempt, for 
example, to see it in another perspective by going around it, turns out to be 
nothing. But the self-maintenance of the unity of a thing in the multiplicity of 
perspectives, which allows one to speak of its sensory perception, is not 
sufficient to allow one to become certain of it as a real material thing. It could 
still be a phantom. The real thing is distinguished from the phantom in that its 
identity is verified through causal connection with other things, in the effects 
which it receives from them and exerts on them. Its materiality shows itself as 
such only in a causal nexus of occurrences, thus, when it is experienced as being 
subject to causal circumstances. In general, we cannot say whether an 
individual, allegedly perceived thing is a real thing, if we take it by itself. Its 
reality only shows itself when it is grasped in connection with other things, 
wherein it is effected by them and likewise effects them. "From a formal point 
of view, the concepts of real substance (understood concretely as thing in the 
widest sense)" - to which also animated beings as ensouled things belong -, 
"real property, real state (real behavior), real causality, are essentially 
interrelated concepts. I say: real causalities, for, in the case of states, we are 
referred back to real circumstances in the form of the dependence of 
something real on something else real. Realities are what they are only with 
reference to other actual and possible realities in the interconnection of 
substantial causality."2 
But this still does not exhaust the conditions under which something is 
139 
given to us as a material thing. The experience of being subject to causal 
circumstances is required. This was presented at first as if it were something 
merely taking place for our consciousness, a connection which we regard 
externally as an observer. But in this analysis, the one who is carrying out the 
reflection on the conditions of givenness has remained in an attitude of self-
forgetfulness, and has not considered that he himself is immersed in this 
interconnection of circumstances, along with other things. The circumstances 
in which a thing "maintains" itself as one and the same do not only involve the 
causal interconnection with the happenings in other things; the observer, as 
the sensuous perceiver, also belongs to them. He experiences a particular 
perspective of a thing because he has turned his head or held his body in this or 
that way, and then, experiences a different, tactual perspective because he has 
grasped it with his hand. He is immersed in these circumstances along with 
other things by means of his sensing body, and gains thereby the evidence: 
"because I have touched it, it has shown itself to me to have this feature," etc. 
Thus whatever shows itself to be a material thing, as this founding substratum, 
stands in an inseparable correlation with the kinaesthetic movements of the 
~erceivin~ body. Thus, what at first app(:are~ to be a higher straturf of Being, 
I.e., the hved body founded on the materIal body, now seemslo be the 
opposite, to be the condition for there "being" for us anything like material 
things at all, things whose reality can only show itself ultimately through their 
sensuous presence. "What the subject has over against himself as world, 
depends upon the lived body and what is specifically psychic."3 
Of course what IS meant here is not the factual dependency on a certain 
psyche, but only the essential correlation between the given ness of a thing with 
its sensuous properties and the structure of the perceiving subject. The way the 
regions "material thing" and "animate being" interpenetrate is indicated by 
this essential correlation. It is not a one-sided relation of foundation, but a 
relationship of correlation, since the sentient animate beings belong to the 
"circumstances" under which materiality shows itself and with respect to 
which speaking of material things can become meaningful. But "it is just this 
relativit~ that is required for the constitution of a physical thing which 
manifests itself in the intuited thing."4 For "it belongs to the sense of 
perception, and experience in general, that they have to do with things which 
should be determinable in themselves and should be distinguishable from all 
others. It belongs to the sense of judgments made on the basis of experience 
that they aim at objective validity."5 Thus, experience, according to its own 
sense, requires a determination of things that is not relative to the body's 
sensuous functioning. For the functioning of sense organs could break down 
or could be abnormally altered; even when normal they are different from 
subject to subject (visual acuity, etc.). Nevertheless to determine an 
experienced thing is to determine it in such a way that, without considering 
this relativity, an agreement on its identity with another. whose senses 
140 
perhaps function differently, becomes possible. The objective determination 
of a thing, the grasping of as it is in itself, is an intersubjective determination. An 
example of this is the fixing of a thing's spatial position not in terms of its 
relation to the location of my body, its being to the "right" or "left," but in 
terms of its place in an ideal system of places, within objective space. "A thing 
is always a form [Gestalt] in its position. The form, however, is qualified in 
each position. The qualities are fillings which are spread out over the surface 
and fill the corporeal form completely. However, qualifications, such as rays 
of light, heat, etc., extend from things into 'empty space.' Physical qualities 
cause qualities and qualitative changes in other things, and indeed such that 
the effect is a constant function of position: to each change in position 
corresponds a change in effect. By virtue of such reference to exactly 
determinable spatial relations, sensory qualities also become amenable to 
exact determination."6 
In this way, the relativity to specific and different sensory functions can be 
set aside. It does not belong to the idea of an objective, material thing that it is 
given only through the senses we in fact have: "the senses could even be 
completely different, so long as they make possible a mutual agreement and 
constitute the appearing of a common nature. On principle, however, the 
subjects could not be blind in all their senses and accordingly blind to space, 
movement and energy. Otherwise there would not be any world of things there 
for them, and in any case not the same as is there for us, the very spatial world, 
nature."7 This means that it belongs to the idea of nature, as the universe of 
objectively determinable realities in the form of spatial things, that it is given 
through sensuousness of some kind or other, and that means that it refers back 
to an originary givenness. But "the objective determination determines a thing 
through those characteristics which are and must be attributable to it that 
enable it to appear to me or to anyone in communication with me, and which 
enable it to be taken as the same thing by each member of the communicative 
community, and also to me under all possible modifications of my sensibility." 
"Therefore, as an intersubjectively identical thing, a thing, in principle, has no 
sensuously intuitive content at all that could be given as intersubjectivcly 
identical. Rather it is only an empty, identical something, the correlate of the 
identification of what appears in changing appearances with diverse contents 
to subjects who are intersubjectively connccted, subjects who have 
corresponding acts in which something appears and acts of experiential-
logical [erfahrungslogischen] thinking, an identification which is possible 
according to experiential-logical rules and which is grounded in them."9 
Nature as objectively determined by natural science is thus the product of 
conceptual determination, but it is not the free invention of thinking subjects. 
For they must be sensuous subjects to whom "something" is given through the 
senses. Conversely, it is then shown [by Husser!], in the subsequent sections 
[of Jdeen II], that it is only through such a nature that a community of 
141 
communicating subjects is possible.' I n order to be able to entcr into 
communication. they must appear to one another as embodied [leibliche] 
subjects such that their bodies are given through sensibility as material things, 
for the experience of an alien psychic subject is only possible as something 
"appresented" in an animate body [Leibkorper]. The starting point for 
naturalizing the psychic and the spiritual is in this relationship of founding. 
Thus nature, in the natural scientific sense, as the idea of a universe of 
objectively determinable realities, and intersubjectivity, a community of 
subjects in communication, refer to one another. Intersubjectivity requires 
the givenness of nature. On the other hand, nature, in the sense of objective 
nature. is a formation of their cognitive performances. This clarifies the sense 
of the "being-in-itself" of nature. For one thing, it means that in order for 
subjects to be in communion with other subjects and to have knowledge of 
themselves as such, something must be unconditionally given, something 
which is not produced by their own performances, their cognitions, judicative 
positings and objectivatings, but which is given through a "primordial 
sensibility," i.e., given in a passivity which includes in itself no sediments of 
earlier active positing performances (even what has been once actively posited 
can then become conscious passively in the form of habituality, of something 
forcing itself into awareness reproductively). Of course nothing can be 
decided a priori concerning whether this sensibility must be the very kind we 
know of from normally functioning subjects. In other words, the subject, 
conceived as beingin an intersubjective context, must be one who is capable of 
sensing with his body. But the being-in-itself of nature, in this fundamental 
sense of something simply given through sensory affectation, signifies only the 
givenness of an "empty identical something." That a thing is there means 
nothing more than that there is a rule according to which the consciousness of 
an identical something, appearing in the multiplicity of the flow of sensuous 
appearances. perspectives, adumbrations, etc., comes about. In this sense, said 
H usserl, "the thing is a rule governing possible appearances. "10 
If it is further said in this regard that the objective determinations of a 
thing made by natural science are determinations of the thing in itself, that 
objective nature is in itself, then the sense of "being-in-itself" here is 
inseparable from the correlation to subjectivity as intersubjectivity and its 
collective cognitive performances. It only means: wherever a sequence of 
appearances is given, the sequence must be able to be so determined that the 
conditions of its appearing can be established independent of specific sensory 
functions by means of determinations effected purely by thought and can be 
reenacted by every subject able to think (one who, in order to be able to 
function as a thinking subject in communication with others. must also be 
sentient). Thus, the being-in-itself of nature, in this sense, is a product of the 
method of objectivation, and this relation to the intersubjectivity exercising 
this method is inseparable from it. 
142 
As a consequence of this, a tension arises between two concepts of nature, 
"nature that is at first, and nature that accrues to us now that we are in 
cooperative interconnection, "II meaning nature as objectively determined. At 
first, nature seemed to be the universe of realities, the world, because 
everything that is to be given to us at all must have its basis in what is given to 
sensibility. Everything must be able to be integrated into the world's nexus in 
order to be determinable, i.e., objectively determinable, by cognition, 
particularly scientific cognition. But now it becomes apparent that "this 
naturalistically considered world is not really the world,"12 but that the world, as 
something which exists in itself in the second, just discussed, sense, is rather a 
formation produced within the world of subjects who are in communication 
with one another. Thus, while it seemed at first that nature, as the universe of 
spatially extended things, of objectively determinable res extensa, was the 
lowest stratum in all existents in the formation of the world, it now turns out 
that we cannot speak of such a stratification as one which subsists in itself. 
One can now see the significance ofthe principle from which H usserl proceeds 
in the inquiry concerning the regions of being and their basic regional 
concepts, namely the principle that such regions can only be considered in 
reference to their correlation to consciousness, in which the kinds and regions 
of being become objects. The necessary presuppositions emerge under which 
regions, strata and a foundational order among strata can be spoken of in the 
first place: to have an entity as an object in its regional peculiarity is 
dependent on an "attitude" ["Einstellung"] of the cognizing SUbject, a 
"predominant apperception"13 under which what is given is, so to speak, 
aimed at in a particular way. That is why the first theme which follows the 
introduction of the concept of the world as the universe of realities and the 
definition of this world as nature is the inquiry into the attitude that 
corresponds to this concept of the world, i.e., the "naturalistic" 
[naturalistischen] attitude. k This is a focusing on "mere things" wherein "all 
predicates that we grant to things under the titles of agreeableness, beauty, 
usefulness, practical suitability, perfection remain completely out of 
consideration."14 Thus this sphere of "mere things," of "nature" does not 
really underlie all existents as a bottommost stratum, rather we reach it by a 
conscious abstraction from all the other characters, significational characters, 
etc., with which things appear to us. The object of physical and mathematical 
natural science is constituted only in that way. The reason that animate nature 
can appear as a higher situated I stratum is that it is possible, and within certain 
limits justified, to regard animate life, which H usserl understood on principle 
as ensouled (the differences between human, animal and plant were not 
considered any further by him in this connection), as something occurring 
within a material body, as bound up with the body and its causally 
conditioned processes. Although it is not sensuously perceivable in the same 
way as a physical event, it is "attributed to" ["einge/egt"] the physical body; it is 
143 
something of which one is conscious along with the body by means of 
"appresentation" in such a way that the right of such an apperception has its 
own way of being legitimated. Just as the apperception "physical thing" 
must be validated in experience by the harmoniousness of the flow of 
experience, so also the appresented psychic [stratum] has its way of being 
confirmed in experience by the fulfillment of expectations which are bound up 
with such an apperception, expectations of certain behavioral patterns of 
object. The definition of the region of animate being through the concept of 
the soul in no way suggests that there is a substance which lies behind the 
modes of appearance of the living thing. Within the bounds of the 
"naturalistic" attitude, for which the psychic essentially counts as an "adjunct" 
to a physical body, soul, like the concept of thing for the region of material 
nature, signifies nothing else than a rule for the flow of possible appearances 
which are apperceived, in accordance with it, as modes of behavior of a living 
thing and are confirmed as such in experience. "Soul" is a unity of 
"manifestation" in a flow of physical events. This holds first of all for the alien 
psychic occurrences and for one's own in so far as they are already subject to 
the objectivating apperception. 
While animate nature can be understood in this way, as founded in the 
physical stratum, the corresponding "attitude" directed toward 
psychophysical connections and dependencies being presupposed, this 
doesn't hold for the spiritual [geistigen] world. For the objects of the 
naturalistic attitude are reached precisely through a systematic abstraction 
from all "spiritual" predicates, from the significative characters, etc., which 
are not attached to things in themselves, but to things in their relation to the 
behavior of personal subjects. Although it is correct that things furnished 
with such characters, are also "embodied" [ihre "Leiblichkeit" haben], for 
instance books, dwellings, etc., are also physical things, what constitutes such 
a thing as a book, etc., is something which cannot be discovered when 
considered physically. 
Consequently a reversal of this whole consideration comes about in the 
transition to the question of the constitution of the socio-cultural world. The 
spiritual world can no longer be understood as a higher stratum "resting on" 
["aufruhend'1 (an expression of Nicolai Hartman's) the lower strata after it 
has been shown that speaking of the lower strata accessible in the "naturalistic 
attitude" is only meaningful in correlation with an attitude consciously 
chosen. Rather, the ascertainment of this correlation necessitates raising the 
question of the subject of this and every attitude, and this is precisely the 
person understood as the subject of freely executed acts, the subject of 
"position-takings." It is this subject through which Husserl defines the 
concept of spirit. While it seemed initially that the distinction of the 
naturalistic and personalistic attitudes (the one as the presupposition of 
natural science, the other of cultural science) concerned two separate attitudes 
144 
on the same level, attitudes which could be chosen and exchanged depending 
on one's scientific purpose, it is now apparent that there are not two equal 
attitudes here. Rather, "the naturalistic attitude is subordinate to the 
personalistic and it gains a certain independence through an abstraction or 
rather through a kind of self-forgetting on the part of the personal ego, a 
process by which, at the same time, it illegitimately absolutizes its world, 
nature. "15 The "personalistic" attitude is prior because it is actually not an 
attitude chosen only for methodological purposes at all, but is the way in 
which we are immediately conscious of ourselves and our world: "The su bject 
not only consciously encounters things in his surrounding world, but also 
other subjects; he sees them as persons who busy themselves in their 
surrounding world, who are determined by their objects and are always 
determinable by new objects. In this attitude it simply does not occur to him to 
'attribute' [einzulegen] spirit [den Geist] to the body [dem Leibe], i.e., to 
regard it as something in the body in the sense of being founded in it, as 
something belonging to reality along with the body. Thus it would not occur 
to him to carry out the pertinent apperception by which its object is given as 
real (the naturalizing apperception). "16 "In the comprehensive experience of 
the existence of another, we understand him immediately as a personal subject 
and therewith as one who is related to the objects to which we are also related: 
to the earth and sky, field and forest, to the room in which 'we'spend our time 
together, to a picture that we see, etc. We are related to a common 
surrounding world; we are in a personal association -
these belong 
together. "17 The goal of the objective determination of what is given, which 
the naturalistic attitude, understood as the abstraction from all other 
determinations of entities, presupposes as the purely "material," is then a 
determinate goal of cognition for subjects who form a community and exist 
with one another as persons. It is an aim which has its absolute limit at the 
spiritual, because it would take from the spiritual its specific character and if 
applied to the spiritual would cause it to disappear as an object of cognition. 
In this sense, spirit is a "counterpart of nature," understood as objectively 
determined nature; it is not a stratum of being founded in it, but its necessary 
correlate with respect to which nature in this sense can at all be spoken of. 
Of course today, the impossibility of a consistent naturalism seems to have 
become almost obvious and Husserl's battle against it seems to have only 
historical significance. But the difficulties of bringing views of man stemming 
from the biological and socio-cultural sciences harmoniously together, 
difficulties which today are not yet completely removed, show that there are 
clarifications involved here which still cannot be viewed as shared by all. For 
only if one sees that the naturalizing of spirit, a procedure which definitely has 
its methodological necessity in biological investigations of the surrounding 
world, does not simply signify the acceptance of ultimate givenness, but is a 
145 
result of a methodological attitude, only then can the difficulties arising from 
the absolutizing of what is only the product of method be overcome. 
Although it seemed at first glance that one could speak of three regions of 
being, material nature, animate nature, and the spiritual world, and that in the 
second volume of Ideen these are depicted as forming a three-membered 
structure, it now becomes apparent that actually there is a two-fold 
articulation, the relationship of nature and spirit, i.e., of the world of nature 
and the world of spirit - with spirit having priority. This is because the 
naturalization of spirit has insurmountable limits for the above-mentioned 
reasons, since the understanding of nature, as a formation produced by spirit, 
seemingly comprehends all, leaving no remainder. Conversely, "it is not the 
whole truth to consider subjects as a part of nature, since that which gives 
nature its sense would then be missing. Nature is a field of constant realities, 
and can only be that in being always relative to an absolute which thus bears 
all relativities, i.e., to spirit. "18 Spirit alone is absolute, non-relative. For "if we 
strike all that is spirit out of the world, there would be no more nature. But if 
we delete Nature, that 'true' intersubjectively objective existence [Dasein], 
something still remains, namely spirit as individual spirit. Then, however, 
spirit loses the possibility of sociality., the possibility of a comprehension 
which presupposes a certain intersubjectivity of the lived body. We would 
then have an individual mind which is no longer a person in the narrower, 
social sense, one related to a material world and therewith also to a world of 
persons. However we would still have ... an ego with its conscious life and it 
would also have its individuality therein, its ways of judging, valuing, of being 
motivated in its position-takings. "19 
To put it another way: the things of nature have no essence oftheir own, no 
individuality. "What distinguishes two things that are alike is real-causal 
connection, which presupposes the here and now, and with that we are 
necessarily referred back to an individual SUbjectivity. "20 Thus, "the unique, 
original individual" is "consciousness taken concretely with its I [Ich]. Any 
other individual is something which appears and has the principle of its 
individuation in the actual and possibk appearings which in turn point back 
to an individual consciousness. "21 Hence "absolute individuation enters into 
the personal ego." For "spiritual beings [Geister] are not unities of 
appearances, but are unities of absolute nexus of consciousness, more 
precisely ego-unities." Nature in contrast "is the X and is fundamentally 
nothing but the X which is determined through general determinations. 
Spiritual being, however, is no X, but is that which is given in the experience of 
a mind itself. "22 
This concluding thought of the work indicates the way in which the 
transition from the methodological concept of constitution, i.e., the 
correlation between what is given and the consciousness which corresponds to 
146 
it, to the metaphysical concept of constitution takes place. With this transition 
the idea that all Being is Being through consciousness, Being posited by 
consciousness, arises from the methodological consideration that all Being is 
necessarily Being for consciousness. Thus consciousness, as far as we can 
become conscious of our ego as a reflecting ego, becomes absolute Being, an 
absolute "region." The transition is guided by the consideration that spirit, in 
the sense of object-positing consciousness, is given immediately to itself in 
reflection, that there is nothing lying behind it which would not be accessible 
to self-experience, no hidden "substance" of which consciousness in its flow 
presents only the accidents. Nature, on the other hand, is never self-given in 
this sense, but is only the X further determinable in infinitum, into whose 
"interior" we cannot penetrate in the same way as we can the interior of spirit, 
because the latter is just that interiority itself given to consciousness. But our 
inability to penetrate into the interior of nature is not due to its remaining 
hidden from us, rather it is because it has no such self-sufficient interior, it is 
only a formation produced by spirit. 
We have traced the way in which Husser! relativized the distinction of 
regions of Being, not merely methodologically, through the reference to 
methodological "attitudes" corresponding to them, but, as well, the way in 
which he absolutely preserved the distinction by deriving it from spirit, 
understood as a consciousness constituting all being. But at the same time what 
makes this transition from a methodological to a metaphysical preservation in 
the sense of an absolute idealism problematic becomes visible. This problem 
becomes apparent once we remind ourselves of the consequences of this 
transition for the concept of nature. The tension which emerged in the course 
of reflection between two aspects of nature - on the one hand, nature as the 
universe of realities and as the founding region on which is built all entities of 
higher regions, the animal and spiritual regions, and on the other hand, nature 
as a formation produced by spirit - was abolished to the advantage of the 
second aspect, so that there can be no more talk of nature as the lowermost 
region of Being founding the others. For in order for this to be the case, all 
regions must be on the same level, which would enable them to be compared to 
one another. But if spirit is absolute Being, and nature a mere relative being, 
"only" constituted in spirit, one can no longer speak of a relationship of 
founding, for the absolute cannot be founded in something relative. However 
this consequence is not compatible with the consideration which in the 
beginning led to conferring a foundational role on the physicalness of nature 
[Naturdinglichkeit], understood as spatio-temporal, causally determinable 
reality. There it was established that the physicalness of nature is the realm of 
"primordial objects" [Urgegenstiinde], the realm of what is given ultimately 
through "primordial sensibility" [Ursinnlichkeit] in a mere accepting, passive 
consciousness, a realm of givenness which bears in itself, at that point, nothing 
formed from active achievements of consciousness. But if all active 
147 
performances of consciousness ultimately depend on such givenness, as the 
"stuff," the sensual hyle which forms the presupposition for all intentional 
"forming" by performances of consciousness,23 then there is still something 
left over in the nature of which we are conscious on the basis of such givenness, 
a remainder which makes it impossible to understand nature as being 
completely a formation produced by mind. This is the limit which was kept to 
in Kant's transcendental philosophy, since the given of sensibility, sensation, 
was acknowledged to be an index of the dependency of human understanding 
on givenness. In this manner Kant, in the "Refutation of Idealism" in the 
Critique of Pure Reason,m showed that the possibility of self-consciousness is 
dependent on the existence of "things outside of me." Thus, this unqualified 
other, standing over and against consciousness, the "thing in itself," obviously 
remained an unknowable ground of appearances. Now as much as Husserl's 
talk of the thing as an "X," a "rule" for the flow of appearances, is reminiscent 
of Kant, Husserl nevertheless overstepped the limit Kant held to when he 
passed from the methodological concept of constitution to a metaphysical 
concept, with its attendant dissolution of nature into a formation produced by 
spirit. But an unresolvable difficulty emerges here for the determination of the 
concept of sensation. For if mind is the absolute, it cannot have anything like a 
simply given "stuff' over and against itself. Sensation, as the power of giving 
the sensual stuff, would, then, in truth not be as it presents itself in immediate 
consciousness, namely a receptive merely accepting consciousness of 
affection. Rather, the fact that it appears that way would be only a result of 
determinate modes of apperception, an aspect which would itself rest on 
active positing performances of consciousness. In other words: the 
unqualified given and sensation as consciousness of unqualified given ness 
must, in the sense of absolute idealism, be deduced from the positing 
performances of spirit. In fact there are occasional attempts at this in Husserl's 
later manuscripts. But such an attempt is in contradiction with the basic 
methodological principle of phenomenology, the principle to which it owes its 
success, the principle that consciousness is to be described purely as it is, and 
whatever is for consciousness is to be described purely as it is for 
consciousness, a principle which is designed to exclude any interpretation 
which stems from any scientific or metaphysical presuppositions. 
This contradiction is not derived argumentatively from outside of Husserl's 
exposition, but is a contradiction between the way he basically understands 
consciousness and the analysis in which consciousness is investigated in detail. 
Basica lly his method is one of universal reflection guided by the correlation of 
consciousness and object. Although consciousness does not exclusively 
consist in the positing of objects in judgments, in theoretically objectivating 
them, what consciousness consists of in a general sense is derived from 
reflection on its positing performances. It is the judgmentally positing 
theoretically objectivating attitude which "discloses" ["enthiUlt'1 what 
148 
consciousness is qua consciousness,24 and this is nothing but the positing 
performances which can become visible through reflection. Accordingly, the 
consciousness of myself, as an ego that senses by means of its body, also 
appears as the product of an objectivating apperception, one which already 
presupposes the constitution of an objective wor!d of spatial things, a 
"nature." In fact, this apperception, in which I apprehend my sensing as 
something added to a physical animate body, is indeed possible and, for 
certain scientific modes of questioning (the psychophysical), necessary. But 
prior to any such objectivating apperception is the immediate sensing 
consciousness with its kinaesthesias in which are constituted for me not only 
things in their manners of appearance, but in which I am aware of myself, not 
only as a positing ego, but as a sensuously affected ego. This state of affairs is 
effectively and incisively presented by Husser! in his analysis of embodiment 
[Leiblichkeit]. But since it is his basic presupposition that the sense of all 
consciousness can be discovered in the judgmentally positing attitude, the 
nature I am aware of in sensing is identified without further ado with the 
r.ature which is the result of objectification based on sensory givenness. In this 
way Husser! gives up the possibility of drawing the systematic consequences of 
his analysis of kinaesthetic consciousness as embodied consciousness. The 
fact that I possess a sensing body, of which I "am in control" in kinaesthesias, 
is then considered as irrelevant for the determination of what I myself am as an 
ego, and of how I am aware of myself as such. The embodiment, of which I am 
aware in sensing, is identified with the embodiment which I, objectivating, 
apperceive as a thing among things. This embodiment is distinguished above 
"mere" things, however, in that an inwardness is "appresented" in it. Thus 
only the pure ego, which is nothing but Kant's "intellektuelle Vorstellung der 
Selhsttatigkeit eines denkenden Subjektes''25 [intellectual representation ofthe 
spontaneity of a thinking subject], counts as that of which I am immediately 
aware, except in distinction to Kant, this is hypostasized into absolute being. 
But this overlooks the fact that nature is more than a result of this 
objectivating, and is more than what can be objectivated in general. My 
immediate consciousness of myself is a consciousness of my mind [Geistes] 
not only as one carrying out positing acts, but one which is in its very self 
already a consciousness of "nature," insofar as I am precisely a sensing ego. 
Nature in this sense, of course, is not exhausted by the nature which is made 
into an object by natural science. But also it is not an X which remains 
unknown. Rather it has its structures which are correlative to the structure of 
sensing bodilirress and are disclosed in it, a structure which constitutes the way 
I always already find myself in my world prior to all striving towards 
objectivation. 
But this should not be taken to mean that this manner of setting the problem 
was alien to Husser!. It is already indicated in his demonstration of the priority 
of the "personalistic" over the "naturalistic," objectivating attitude. There it is 
149 
shown that the "personalistic" attitude is really not an attitude, but is the way 
that we immediately have the world, a way within which the thought of 
considering the psychic as an annex to a body, conceived as a thing, does not 
occur to us. The reference here is to his later, still unpublished writings on the 
"Lebenswelt, "n in which this immediacy of our having of the world is 
analyzed. Whereas the inquiry concernjing regions of Being was guided from 
the beginning by considering how entities are objectified in scientific 
explication and are themes of sciences, in these later investigations there is no 
more talk of regions of Being, since the concern in them is a dimension of 
immediate experience, which is prior to such scientific interpretation of what 
is experienced, a discussion of how the inquiry into the "constitution of the 
world" must be established on this basis is beyond the scope of this study. It 
will be sufficient to say that this constitution cannot be clarified as the 
correlate of the objectivating-positing pure ego. The correlation that must be 
considered must be one involving the entire sensing ego, concretely 
understood, i.e., as that ego is aware of itself not only as a thinking ego, but as 
one that has feelings and moods. Also, structures and relationships of 
founding would emerge in such a correlation that could not be understood as 
those pertaining to regions and strata of Being, since the presulJpositions and 
limits of such distinctions were shown in Husserl's investigations. 
The approaches to this fruitful and important inquiry are indicated in 
Husserl's work, but he was not able to draw the systematic consequences from 
them, consequences which would have kept him from that metaphysical 
absolutization of spirit, from passing from the methodological over to the 
metaphysical concept of constitution. He did not draw these consequences 
because he adhered in principle to the conception that consciousness is 
essentially objectivating, 
positing [vergegenstiindlichend-setzendes] 
consciousness, so that whatever we have as consciousness, and whatever we 
are conscious of through it, can be "disclosed" by reflecting on its positing 
performances. 
Whether this concerns a limit only of Husserlian 
phenomenology or one of transcendental philosophy in general would be a 
subject for further inquiries. 
In spite of these limits, which are seen through a critical analysis of the 
second volume of Ideen, the abiding value of this project is that, in it, the 
impossibility of an absolutization of layered strata of Being and of a 
corresponding interpretation of "constitution of the world" became evident, 
and that, thereby, the limits of a universal naturalization was shown. This puts 
these investigations among the contemporaneous efforts to secure the 
autonomy and methodological independence of the socio-cultural science 
But Husserl's investigations achieve an incomparably greater clarity and 
penetration than the works of Dilthey and the southwest German school. 
Since Husserl's analyses were not guided in their particulars by the idealistic 
program, nor by a concept of consciousness fixed in advance, but by the 
150 
phenomena themselves, in their richness they reveal to subsequent, 
appreciative understanding those points where thinking, which goes beyond 
his idealistic program, can begin. The special importance of Husserl's 
investigations lies in this. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
"The German word "Sein" will be translated "Being," while "Seiendes" will be 
rendered "entity" or "what exists" or "being," according to the context. 
b Husserl's major early work in this regard is his Logische Untersuchungen, which 
first appeared in 1900~0 I, especially the first volume of that work, Prolegomena 
zur Reinen Logik. See Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations, trans. J.N. 
Findlay (New York: Humanities Press, 1970). His most significant later works 
dealing with the foundations of logic are Formal and Transcendental Logic, 
trans. D. Cairns (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969) and Experience and 
Judgment, trans. J. Churchill and K. Ameriks (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1973). 
C See Logical Investigations, Vol. II, Chap. 6. 
d For a definition of the concept of "region," see Edmund Husserl, Ideas, trans. 
W.R. Boyce Gibson (London: Allen & Unwin, 1931), Section 16, p. 77. For 
Husserl's discussion of formal and regional ontologies and their categories, see 
the entire first chapter of Ideas ("Fact and Essence"). 
eSee Ideas, Section 149, pp. 411 ff. 
fFor instance, Paul Ricoeur, "Etudes sur les 'Meditations Cartesiennes' de 
Husserl," Revue philosophiquede Louvain, LII (1954), pp. 75~109. An English 
translation is in Ricoeur's Husserl: An Analysis of his Phenomenology, trans. E. 
Ballard and L. Embree (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1967) - see 
especially p. 86 and p. 102. See also, Marvin Farber, The Foundation of 
Phenomenology (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1943), pp. 
537~73. 
gSee Ideas, Section 49, p. 153. 
hE. Husser!, Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phdnomenologischen 
Philosophie, zweites Buch, Husserliana IV, ed. M. Biemel (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1952); cited in "Author's Footnotes" and below as Ideen II. 
i The essential relativity and not the factual one criticized below. 
j Ideen II, pp. 162 ff. 
k The naturalistic attitude is not to be confused with the natural (naturlich) 
attitude. In the latter attitude objects are given to us and are taken by us to have 
precisely the spiritual "predicates" which the naturalistic attitude abstracts 
from. For Husser!'s description of the natural attitude, see Ideas, Sections 
27 ~30, pp. 10 1 ~ 106. For a comparison of the two attitudes, see Ideen II, pp. 180 
ff. 
I Reading "situierte" for "studierte." 
m Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N. K. Smith (London: 
Macmillan, 1968), pp. 244-47. 
n Landgrebe is probably referring to Die Krisis der europiiischen Wissenschaften 
und die transzendentale Phdnomenologie, Husserliana VI, ed. W. Biemel (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1954); English trans., The Crisis of European 
15l 
Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, trans. D. Carr (Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1970). 
AUTHOR'S NOTES 
I. See the interpretation of the concept of constitution authorized by Husser] 
himself: Eugen Fink, "Was will dje Phanomenoiogie Edmund Husserls?" Die 
Tatwelt, 1934 [English translation in Research in Phenomenology II (1972) pp. 
5-27]. 
2. Ideen II, p. 126 [See translator's footnote "h" for the full reference.] 
3. I bid., p. 75. 
4. I bid., p. 77. 
5. I bid., p. 82. 
6. I bid., p. 84. 
7. Ibid., p. 86. 
8. Ibid., p. 87. 
9. Ibid., p. 88. 
10. Ibid., p. 86. 
II. Ibid., p. 208. 
12. Ibid. 
13. Ibid., p. 2. 
14. Ibid. 
15. Ibid., pp. 183 f. 
16. Ibid., p. 190. 
17. Ibid., p. 191. 
18. Ibid., p. 297. 
19. Ibid. 
20. Ibid., p. 299. 
21. Ibid., p. 301. 
22. Ibid. 
23. See Ideas, Section 85, pp. 246-5/. [See translator's footnote "d" for full 
reference.] 
24. See Ideen II, pp. II ff. [The rest of Landgrebe's footnote refers to the book in 
which this essay appeared, and refers the reader to p. 38 and pp. 197 ff. See above 
for the reference.] 
25. 
I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, pp. 246-47. [See translator's footnote "m" 
for the full reference. Here also Landgrebe refers the reader to another portion 
of his Der Weg der Phiinomen%gie, Chapter V.] 
THE PROBLEM POSED BY THE TRANSCENDENTAL SCIENCE OF 
THE A PRIORI OF THE LlFE-WORLD* 
LUDWIG LANDGREBE 
The problem of the passage back to the life-world is the focal point of 
Husserl's later work. It is the theme of the Crisis,1 and the working out of this 
problem occupied him incessantly in the days prior to his terminal illness. 
With his essay on the crisis of European science, he sought to present a new 
way of introducing phenomenology and of grounding and justifying its 
historical necessity. This work is not an epilog to Husserl's life work that 
indicates a turn or break in his intellectual development. Rather, it is an 
incomplete, final work that can be seen to be the result of insights obtained 
earlier, particularly those presented in his lectures on "first philosophy. ,," Not 
only his text, but also the reflections related to this composition and now 
offered as appendices portend how the unity and congruence of his earlier, 
individual analyses can be understood from this finally acquired position and 
where answers for the questions which remain open are to be sought. 
It was in the first part of the essay on the "crisis," which was published in 
1936 in the journal, Philosophia,b that the expression "life-world" 
[Lebenswelt] first appeared in Husserl's published work. But its appearance in 
this torso did not enable the magnitude of the problems indicated by this 
expression to be recognized. Husserl did not use the expression "life-world" 
until late; it is encountered at the earliest in the manuscripts toward the end of 
the 1920's. However, it is only the new term for a state of affairs that Husserl 
had in mind, at least as a problem, since the time of the Ideas (1913), a work in 
which he began from the positivistic requirement that a "natural concept of 
the world" be accounted for. However, Husserl realized the full significance of 
this problem and the way it was to be treated only at the time of the Crisis 
essay, and he progressively developed it further in the last years of his life. It 
became apparent that the problem posed by the method of the 
phenomenological science of the life-world is not a specific problem to be 
*Translated by Robert M. Harlan from "Das Problem der transzendentalen 
Wissenschaft vom lebensweltlichen A priori," Phdnomen%gie und Geschichte 
(Giitersloh: G. Mohn, 1967), pp. 148-66. The article was first presented at the 
International Philosophical Congress, Mexico, in 1963. 
152 
153 
addressed by phenomenological-constitutive analysis but, rather, that it 
concerns the innermost dimension of the constitutive accomplishments of 
transcendental sUbjectivity. The difficulties which come to light with this 
problem, then, are related to the concept of transcendental subjectivity is elf 
and to the method of its disclosure. Husserl reworked all of his earlier, 
fundamental expositions in connection with these difficulties, and the 
problems which could not be clarified by these expositions became visible. 
Thus, Husserl's thinking in this late work shows itself in its unflagging energy, 
by means of which everything previously attained is again placed in question 
and new dimensions of problems beneath that already attained are opened up. 
In the first section of the following exposition, then, the context in which 
the problem of the life-world appears in the Crisis must be briefly discussed. In 
the second section, the concept of the life-world as the historical world and as 
the world arising from the immediate experience of nature is developed. In the 
third section, the method of acquiring the a priori of the life-world, its 
difficulties and the way in which it is to be clarified will be treated. 
I. THE CONNECTION BETWEEN THE PROBLEMATIC OF THE CRISIS AND 
THE PROBLEM OF THE LIFE-WORLD 
It is not possible here to critically analyze the design ofthe entire Crisis. As a 
new attempt at an introduction to phenomenology, the Crisis takes up all of 
H usserl 's earlier considerations concerning the way into phenomenology, and 
in particular devotes the entire third part to the way through psychology. We 
must refrain from considering this here. The problem of the life-world is 
treated, particularly in the second part, in connection with the question of the 
way into phenomenology from the pre given life-world. In connection with 
this, material not included in the text but now included in the appendices must 
be taken into consideration. The problem of the life-world, therefore, is 
connected with the question concerning phenomenology as that fundamental 
philosophical science which is to provide the ultimate justification and 
legitimation of human life. While its title implies that the Crisis is a discussion 
of the theory of science, working through this work shows how far H usserl has 
departed from the style of philosophical thinking which, since the end of the 
nineteenth century, understood philosophy primarily to be the theory of 
science. On the basis of this understanding, neo-Kantianism - the dominant 
school in Germany at that time - began from the fact of the sciences and 
inquired into the transcendental conditions for their possibility. To a large 
extent, Husserl's Ideas is also oriented by the theory of science in this sense. It 
takes as its given the regions of being as they are divided within the domain of 
scientific investigation and searches for the conditions for the possibility of 
this division by the development of the regional a priori. In contrast to this, the 
154 
concern in the Crisis is the passage back behind the given sciences in their 
facticity and the inquiry into thefacticity ofthisfact. For a crisis has befallen 
the sciences because they are no longer in a position to give an account of the 
sense of their own deeds. These sciences, through whose application the world 
was reshaped into the modern, technical world, have become "empty of sense" 
[Sinnentleerung]. Thus, the inquiry into the crisis of European science is 
nothing other than the inquiry into the crisis of the modern, technical world. 
That this is not a question of a crisis of the foundations of science but, rather, 
of a crisis of modern life in general is something that has forced itself upon the 
general consciousness since the writing of the Crisis and has become most 
clearly visible in the moral problems which confront modern atomic 
physicists, who are faced with the practical and, in particular, the political 
consequences of their discoveries. 
What path does phenomenology take in order to contribute to the 
overcoming of this crisis? Phenomenology inquires into its origin. And 
because it is the crisis of the sciences and of the world interpreted by and 
transformed through the sciences, phenomenology inquires into the origin of 
modern science: origin in the sense of the a priori conditions for their 
possibility. However, what is new in the path adopted in the Crisis is that these 
a priori conditions are no longer sought purely systematically by the grasping 
of the essence of the fundamental regional concepts but, rather, by a unique 
"interweaving of historical and systematic investigations."2 Therefore, what 
the sense of the phenomenological inquiry into the origin actually is obtains its 
last if not its complete clarification in this work. The question of the method of 
the science of the life-world is, therefore, nothing other than the question of 
the sense and method of the phenomenological investigation of origins as 
such. For Husserl, the inquiry into the origin of modern science is an inquiry 
into the historical and systematic conditions under which this or any science 
could arise within a world that is not yet understood in light of scientific 
interpretation; i.e., precisely the "life-world." "The life-world was always there 
for mankind before science, then,just as it continues its manner of being in the 
epoch of science."3 "The life-world is what we know best, what is always taken 
for granted in all of human life, always familiar to us in its typicality through 
experience,"4 "always already there, existing in advance, the 'basis' for all 
praxis, whether theoretical or extra-theoretical," and, thus, "the foundation 
for all objective knowledge." It is "pregiven to us not occasionally but always 
and necessarily as the universal field of all actual and possible praxis, as 
horizon. To live is always to live in certainty of the world. "5 
Therefore, the first requirement for the inquiry into the origin of science is 
the clarification of the relation the pre-scientific life-world has to the world 
interpreted by science. We understand this relation as follows: the life-world is 
always pregiven prior to all science and is the basis for all praxis and aims 
which arise in the course of natural life. Thus, the new, Galilean natural 
155 
science which arose from pre-scientific life and its surrounding world served 
"a purpose which necessarily lay in this pre-scientific life and was related to its 
life-world. Man (induding the natural scientist), living in this world, could put 
all of his practical and theoretical questions only to it - could refer in his 
theories only to it in its open, endless horizons of things unknown. "6 "This 
actually intuited, actually experienced and experienceable world in which our 
whole life takes place practically, remains unchanged as what it is, in its own, 
essential structure and its own concrete, causal style, whatever we may do with 
or without techniques. Thus, it is also not changed by the fact that we invent a 
particular technique, the Galilean, which is called physics. ''7 
The inquiry into the relation between the life-world and the world 
interpreted scientifically is divided, therefore, into two questions: 
1. What purpose does science serve for life within its life-world? 
2. To what extent does the life-world remain unaltered in spite of its 
transformation by the application of science? 
1. The life-world is "the sphere of well-known certainties taken to be 
unconditionally valid and proven practically in human life prior to all 
requirements for scientific grounding.''!! "All life rests upon prediction or, as 
we can now say, upon induction. In the most primitive way, even the ontic 
certainty of any straight-forward experience is inductive. Things 'seen' are 
always more than what we 'actually' and 'genuinely' see of them. Perceiving is 
essentially a having-something-itself and at the same time a having-
something-in-advance, a meaning-something-in-advance. All praxis, with its 
projects, involves inductions.''9 According to Husserl, the genuine, 
philosophical justification of empiricism lies in the fact that it is oriented by 
this inductive style of everyday life; empiricism is covertly guided by the 
"tendency toward a scientific discovery of the everyday, familiar and yet 
scientifically unknown life-world. "10 
To what extent, therefore, has science itself grown out of this style of the 
pre-scientific life within the "life-world," and to what extent does science serve 
this life's purposes? Science performs "prediction extended to infinity." "All 
praxis with its projects, involves inductions; it is just that ordinary inductive 
knowledge, even if expressly formulated and verified, is 'artless' compared to 
the artful, 'methodical' inductions which can be carried to infinity in the 
method of Galilean physics."tI 
2. To what extent does the life-world remain unaltered in spite of the 
transformation of the world by science? Alteration by science lies in the fact 
that its purposes and works themselves, as do all purposes and aims, "flow" 
into the life-world. 12 By this flowing, the life-world becomes a world altered at 
any given time by historical conditions. However, the life-world itself is not 
altered in its core: for "the scientists themselves are men within the life-world-
along with other men. The life-world is the world for everyone; thus, the 
sciences, which are at first the worlds of the scientists, are there for all men as 
156 
ours and as achieved results ... they are there for all-just as the life-world is 
for everyone. "13 This does not simply mean that men continue living as men 
who strive to act and who set aims for themselves using this new means of 
prediction. The alteration of the world by science can itself be intuited by the 
perception of the things and processes brought about by science. These things 
and processes themselves become perceptual things within the life-world, the 
world in which man lives as one who senses and perceives through his bodily 
senses. The invariance of the life-world is preserved in all historical alteration 
of the world by the deeds and works of man, whether they rest on artless 
induction or on the methodical induction of science. The style of the life-
world, on the ground of which the world which stands immediately and 
sensuously before us as the world self-evidently valid for everyone, is 
preserved. 
H ow is this extended prediction accomplished by science? By the fact that 
"in the open infinity of possible experiences, we measure the life-world - the 
world constantly given to us as actual in our concrete world-life - for a well-
fitting garb of ideas, that of the so-called objective, scientific truths. That is, 
through a method which (as we hope) can actually be carried out in every 
particular detail and which can be continually verified, we first construct 
numerical indices for the actual and possible sensory plena of the concretely 
intuited shapes of the life-world, and in this way obtain possibilities of 
predicting concrete occurrences in the intuitably given life-world, occurrences 
which are not yet or no longer actually given. And this kind of prediction 
infinitely surpasses the accomplishments of everyday prediction. "14 
By this we have not only characterized the Galilean method of mente 
concipere, of projection with its verification by experimentation, but at the 
same time have implied that the predelineative ideas are precisely our 
projections, projections that must precede experience and, in this sense, are a 
priori in contrast to experience, for they rest on the human reason's capability 
to project in this way. As a result, science, from its origin in the beginning of 
the modern era, is guided by the presupposition that it can cognitively 
determine the world in such a way that the world is not conditioned by the 
relativity of sensory experience and the opinions founded on this experience; 
therefore, unconditioned by doxa. To that extent, science requires the 
hypothesis of the being-in-itself of cognitively determined nature. But this 
hypothesis is only "one among the many practical hypotheses and projects 
which make up the life of human beings in this life-world," and they "belong, 
as do all aims, whether they are 'practical'in some other, extra-scientific sense 
or are practical under the title of 'theory, 'eo ipso to the unity ofthe life-world, 
if we only take the life-world in its complete and full concreteness. "15 
However, the sciences and philosophy of the beginning of the modern era 
did not recognize this hypothesis of being-in-itself as a hypothesis. Because 
they failed to recognize this, they were overcome at the time of their grounding 
157 
at the beginning of the modern era by a fascination with the metaphysical 
concept of truth, the concept according to which true being in itself is what is 
constant and abiding behind the alterable and changeable world of doxa, the 
world of illusion of the senses and their prejudices. I6 This conviction that the 
world interpreted scientifically in the sense of modern science is the true world 
is what H usserl criticized as the objectivism of the modern era. Averting the 
crisis of the technological world depends on overcoming this conviction. In 
contrast to this supposedly in-itself, true world of science, the experienced 
actuality of the life-world is the domain of the merely subjective-relative, a 
domain of which there is no true knowledge and no true science. Nevertheless, 
"the contrast between the subjectivity of the life-world and the 'objective,' the 
'true' world" - "which is always thought of in advance as nature in an 
expanded sense of the word" -lies in the fact that "the latter is a theoretical-
logical substruction, the substruction of something that is in principle not 
perceivable, in principle not experienceabIe in its own proper being, whereas the 
subjective, in the life-world, is distinguished in all respects precisely by its 
being actually experienceable. "17 The life-world is a realm of original evidences 
of that which is given as "itself," "for every mode of induction has the sense of 
being an induction of something intuitable, of something possibly perceivable 
as the thing itself or rememberable as having been perceived, etc. "18 
Overcoming the crisis of objectivism means, therefore, the task "of bringing 
about the recognition of the primal legitimacy of these evidences and indeed of 
their higher dignity in the grounding of knowledge compared to that of the 
objective-logical evidences. "19 The necessity of this task is shown by referring 
to the very simple fact that all theoretical formations of science, no matter how 
complicated, can only be accepted as true if they are verified experimentally. 
This verification means, however, that the previously calculated and predicted 
process can be ascertained to occur by means of our sensory experience. For 
this reason, as Husserl pointed out, every construction of a scientific theory 
requires representative models [A-fodellvorstellungen].2o They are nothing 
other than life-world intuitions "which are suitable for facilitating the 
conception of the objective ideals in question. "21 In fact, the question of the 
sense and origin of the representative models which guide mathematical 
natural science has become a central issue in the current philosophical 
reflection on the foundations of mathematical natural science. 
It is necessary, then, to inquire back from the objective-logical evidences to 
the primal evidence in which the life-world is constantly pregiven. For 
experience is "an evidence that takes place purely in the life-world and as such 
is the source of evidence for what is objectively established in the sciences. "22 
The inquiry back to the life-world, therefore, means nothing less than the 
justification of the domain of doxa, for "the life-world is nothing other than 
the world of mere doxa, traditionally treated so disdainfully. "23 For Husserl, 
the necessity of this passage back is in fact especially grounded in his 
158 
confrontation with modern thought. But this view does allow a consideration 
of the historical and systematic significance of the problem of the l(!e-world 
within the history of European philosophy as a whole and the relation of 
phenomenology to the tradition of metaphysics. 
Several observations could be included here in this connection. Modern 
philosophy was not the first to disdain doxa. Rather, such was the case from 
the moment Parmenides differentiated his two ways: the way of truth, which 
can be nothing other than the truth of a well-rounded, imperishable and 
unalterable being, and the forbidden way, which leads into night and in which 
becoming, change, alteration and the fluctuating opinions of mortal men are 
opposed to being. From that point on, what abides and is constant was 
understood as the truth of being, whether it was interpreted as the idea and the 
realm of ideas, the eternal formae substantiales, or as the abiding form of 
regularity pertaining to the course of the world, projected by the divine mind 
and imagistically understood by man. The presupposition of a truth 
pertaining to the imperishable and unalterable being behind the world, the 
world experienced as moving and altering and found to be constantly in flux, 
is the one which forms the basis for the development of occidental 
metaphysics in all of its variations. At the end of its development stands 
Nietzsche's demand for the abolition of every kind of "world behind the 
world" [Hinterwelt]. This means not only the abolition of the idea of a 
transcendent God, but also the abolition of the presupposition of an abiding 
"in-itself" standing behind constant change and a return to the "innocence of 
becoming" which is not measured by something abiding and constant. Thus, 
Heidegger justifiably called Nietzsche's philosophy the final word of 
occidental philosophy. It is an end insofar as Nietzsche's philosophy seeks to 
negate the basis of this metaphysics, the in-itself of constant being within the 
framework of the antithesis of being and becoming, of truth and doxa, from 
which the development of metaphysics departed, and to grasp the side of 
becoming. After this conclusion of metaphysics, Husserl proclaimed the 
"Heraclitean flux" itself to be the theme of the ultimately grounding, 
philosophical science. Thus, the claim was made that the way of night 
forbidden by Parmenides is the genuine way to philosophical truth, that the 
way of night can prove to be the "passage back to the origin" [Riickgang zu 
den Miittern]. One can also say that Feuerbach's demand that what is to be 
taken up in the text of philosophy is what is not philosophy finds its 
realization here, though admittedly in a way that Feuerbach could not have 
imagined. 24 Doxa should no longer be something disregarded by philosophy; 
doxa itself must be justified in its necessity and truth by way of a "passage back 
to the naivete of life - but in a reflection which rises above this naivete of life. "25 
This does not mean, however, that problems emerge here which can no 
longer be managed by the conceptual tools of the metaphysical tradition. In 
his own way, then, Husser! confronts a task that Heidegger at approximately 
159 
the same tiine, termed the "passage back to the ground of metaphysics," though 
the paths for this passage back are different for the two philosophers. It is that 
ground which has, in the history of metaphysics, first given rise to the 
distinction between episteme and doxa. 
II. THE LIFE-WORLD AS THE HISTORICAL WORLD AND AS THE WORLD 
ARISING FROM THE IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE OF NATURE 
In the preceding discussion, the life-world was introduced as the domain of 
original evidences from which the sense of all other evidences attainable in 
practical life and in the theoretical activity of the objective sciences can be 
understood. The first step of the phenomenological passage back to the 
dimension of ultimate evidence is the phenomenological reduction with its 
suspension of the general thesis of the existential belief [Seinsglauben], the 
belief in the being of the world as a world existing in itself. Husserl established 
this program early in his writings. Therefore, the passage back to the evidence 
of the life-world, as the theme of constitutive analysis, turns out to be his last 
step in the concrete carrying out of his program of the reduction. For the life-
world is this "pregiven world, pregiven to all of us as persons within the 
horizon of our being with other men; therefore, pregiven to us in every actual 
connection with others as the world, common to us all," the "constant basis of 
validity, an ever available source of what is taken for granted, to which we, 
whether as practical men or as scientists, lay claim as a matter of course. "25 
Therefore, the "life-world" is not a new theme for Husserl, one that he had 
never taken up previously. Rather, the expression is nothing other than the 
designation for the correlate of what was called the "natural attitude" in the 
Ideas, a correlate henceforth understood in its full concretion. The prior 
certainty of the world's givenness is the certainty pertaining to the "general 
thesis of the natural attitude," certainty pertaining to the belief in the world 
integral to natural life. It is apparent that this belief in the existence of the 
world is not merely a problem for an "epistemology," which would, 
accordingly, be concerned with the ground of the empty certainty of a "being 
outside of us. "Rather, this certainty is structured in itself, is filled with content 
and is differentiated. The world given with such certainty is the "life-world" in 
question. With the inquiry into its a priori - and this means an inquiry into the 
transcendental-constitutive conditions for its givenness - phenomenology is 
led hack to the inner-most constitutive accomplishments of transcendental 
SUbjectivity, of the "residuum" remaining after the reduction, which make all 
other constitutive accomplishments possible. 
After this demonstration of the origin of all scientific as well as all 
philosophical notions of a being-in-itself in its abiding and constant truth as a 
necessary hypothesis for existence within the life-world [lebensweltlichen 
160 
Dasein], the following question arises: in what sense can this dimension ol 
ultimate evidence, which in comparison to the evidences of science appears to 
be purely sUbjective evidence, be the domain of fundamental philosophical 
science fphilosophischen Grundwissenschaft]? "Can there be, in addition to 
objective truth, yet a second truth, the subjective?"26It would be a science, the 
exclusive task of which is "to comprehend precisely this style, precisely this 
whole merely SUbjective and apparently ungraspable 'Heraclitean flux. "27 
Therefore, its task is to comprehend the domain of doxa, which was excluded 
from the entire domain of the knowable from the beginning of the history of 
metaphysics. 
In the Crisis, this science is introduced at first as a postulate, a postulate of 
"that novel, universal science of the subjectivity which pregives the world. "28 
The fundamental philosophical science of the life-world, then, is nothing 
other than the carried out, transcendental phenomenology itself with its task 
of searching for the world-constituting accomplishments of transcendental 
subjectivity in their "innermost dimension." Thus, with the inquiry into the 
life-world, the intention guiding Husserl from the beginning reaches a stage 
towards its fulfillment at which the problem pertaining to the method of 
constitutive disclosure can be posed in its most incisive form. 
It is by no means sufficient - and this is a self-criticism that refers to the way 
Husserl introduced the reduction initially - "that we may use no sort of 
knowledge arising from the sciences as premises, and we may take the sciences 
into consideration only as historical facts, taking no position of our own as to 
their truth. ''29 This requirement already follows from the bracketing of the 
presupposition of a true world existing in itself. Objective science and its 
assertions, then, are not to be taken along with their claim to truth. Rather, 
only its arising and its presence as a cultural fact that appeared in history along 
with other cultural facts are to be noted. However, Husserl adds the following 
to this: "In a certain way, concern with matters of this sort belongs even more 
constantly to the objective thematic of the historian, who must, after all, 
reconstruct the changing surrounding life-worlds of the peoples and periods 
with which he deals .... The same thing holds if we thematize all periods and 
peoples and finally the entire spatio-temporal world in the unity of a 
systematic survey, paying constant attention, of course, to the relativity of the 
surrounding life-worlds of the respective men, peoples and periods in their 
mere facticity .... Each aspect (within a particular surrounding world) is 
considered individually. Then, at a higher level, each surrounding world, each 
temporality is considered individually. Each particular intuition yields an 
ontic validity, whether in the mode of actuality or possibility. The occurrence 
of the particular intuition always presupposes other intuitions having 
objective validity - presupposes for us, the observers, the universal basis for 
the validity of the world. "30 This means that this comparative, universal 
observing is always founded on the "natural attitude." 
161 
In view of this historically comparative, "cultural-historical" study of the 
world in its historical change and in its differentiation into the respectively 
different, historical surrounding worlds, a study based upon the general thesis 
of the natural attitude, the methodological requirement that we bracket this 
general thesis acquires new significance .. This bracketing not only has the task 
of showing how consciousness of the world in the mode of horizonal 
consciousness is always implicit in every consciousness of an entity within the 
world but, in addition, it must show how this horizon is a historical horizon. 
This means, however, that it must not only suspend the ontic positing implicit 
in any consciousness of a particular something, e.g., in the perception of a 
thing, but must also become aware of the fact that every particular ontic 
positing is a positing within the horizon of the world as a world that has come 
to be historically. In every positing, the world is implicit not only as the 
horizon of what is present simultaneously but as the horizon of the past as 
well. "Because of this constantly flowing horizonal character, then, every 
validity brought about straight-forwardly (by a genuine act) in natural life 
within the world always presupposes validities extending back, immediately 
or mediately, into a necessary subsoil [Untergrund] of obscure, though 
occasionally available, reactivatable validities, all of which, together with 
genuine acts, makes up a single, indivisible nexus of life. "31 
Moreover, this discovery of the world as what is implicit as the horizon of 
the positing of every particular entity shows that the world is not, as it was for 
Kant, the idea of the totality of all entities which can only be comprehended 
subsequent to one's running through the multiplicity of entities. The world is 
not the concept of object arising from reason, a concept to which nothing 
corresponds in experience. Rather, the world is always given as a horizon 
along with the givenness and experience of particular objects. Kant was not 
able to see this because he was unaware of the structure of horizonal 
consciousness, which was one of Husserl's most important discoveries. 
To begin with, therefore, the task of the phenomenological clarification of 
the "life-world" is to grasp the style of this life within the world. Its systematic 
unfolding "as life within the world and of our own lives as living within the 
world leads ... to its style of historicity. The de facto present is a present of a 
past and has a future before it and, thus, by means of free variation of the de 
facto present we see this is true of every imaginable present." However, "all 
possible, historical variants are variants of the world valid for us. "32 The only 
way we can make sense of the idea of historical variations of our world is by 
regarding the variations to be "compossible"with the world known to us, with 
our historical world. Thus, the horizon of our life-world proves to be the 
horizon of world history, the history of the one world which includes all of its 
modifications by historical surrounding worlds. "World history - its concrete 
being in the modality of time as the flowing present with its past and future -
can be understood as the history of the world valid for us, a validity 
162 
originating from me, as the history of our representation of the world in 
subjective temporality, the temporality in which our representations of the 
world emerge for us having validity and content. "33 
It becomes apparent here how the development of the problem of the life-
world is the result of the further development of ideas which H usserl presented 
for the first time in his lectures on "first philosophy" (1923). In these lectures, 
H usserl discussed for the first time the structure of consciousness of the world 
as an encompassing, horizonal consciousness in its foundational. systematic 
significance and put forward the methodological requirement that the 
reduction must not be limited to the bracketing of the existential thesis 
involved in individual acts. Rather, we must bracket in addition the horizon of 
the world in its totality, a horizon that is always implicit in every ontic 
positing. Husserl termed this insight then his most important discovery. It 
became apparent only with his later work that Husserl discovered history 
phenomenologically in the following way. The horizon of the life-world is 
nothing other than the horizon of world history: implicit in the horizonal 
consciousness within the life-world is the horizon of world history. With this, 
the inquiry into the accomplishments of world-constituting, transcendental 
subjectivity is assigned its ultimate and most comprehensive task. The 
constituting accomplishments of transcendental subjectivity must include the 
conditions for the possibility of experiencing the l!fe-world as a historical 
world in its historicity. 
On the other hand, the life-world is obviously always the world of im-
mediate experience, experience in which what is perceived shows itself in its 
"itselfness," in the structures of its spatio-temporality, to men who are 
sensuously perceiving, kinaesthetic subjects; therefore, experience in which the 
world has already been revealed for man as nature prior to all scientific 
interpretation and objectification. That is, a particular and changing idea of 
nature is always included in man's world-horizon. This idea of nature, 
which is always changing and is not the idea of nature in itself constructed by 
the objective sciences, is the idea which determines man's behavior towards 
and intercourse with things. Nature, as this "nature of the surrounding 
world," is not "alien to spirit"34 but, rather, is always "idealized," is 
understood on the basis of eide - on the basis of an a priori that serves to guide 
prediction, which is always necessary for natural life. As such, "history is 
presupposed. "35 The a priori's continued validity as the abiding and constant 
truth in contrast to the flux of the de facto realization of the eide in particular 
entities is, therefore, a "naivete," just as the continued validity of the a priori of 
the modern, objective natural sciences is a naivete, because it absolutizes what 
is itself something formed by historical conditions and historical traditions. 
The immediate experience of nature in sensory perception and the historically 
changing ideas of nature which are formed on the basis ofthis experienc gives 
rise, therefore to the question concerning those constitutive accomplishments 
163 
which make possible precisely this change and alteration and, thus, the history 
of the change of world-horizons. In other words, the life-world is nothing 
other than the concrete, historical world with its traditions and, within these 
traditions, its changing ideas of nature. Therefore, the question concerning 
the constitution of the life-world, understood in its full extent, is nothing 
other than the question concerning the constitution of the world as the 
historical world. 
Admittedly, the following objection might be raised. The life-world is and 
remains the world of immediate, sensory experience, the correlate of which is 
spatio-corporal nature. With this reduction to nature of the historically 
changing ideas of nature, in the way each forms a part of each historical, 
cultural world, is not nature denied as the constant and abiding subsoil of 
history which remains unaltered amidst the change of the historical worlds? 
According to the determination that the ideas of nature formed both by 
ordinary men and by philosophy and science are historically variable in the 
way that they belong to the horizon of each historical cultural world and are 
only hypotheses necessary for the prediction required by life, there would no 
longer be a criterion for their truth value. It would no longer be possible to say, 
for example, that the ideas of modern science are evidently more correct than 
those of Aristotle. Husser! would reply that the ideas of modern science are 
truer insofar as they make possible better prediction as required by existence 
within the life-world; however, they are not true in the sense of final validity. 
For all concepts of nature are "hypotheses" with the significance of being 
merely presumptive and, hence, of being surpassable by means of further 
discoveries; they are never concepts of the being of nature in itself. In its 
surpassability and merely pragmatic significance, modern science is also 
subject to the law of the "Heraclitean flux." 
In view of such misgivings, it is readily understandable "that, in the history 
of philosophy, theoretical man as it were plunges into the theme of'objective' 
knowledge of the world, of truths knowable by reason and valid for everyone, 
truths which, at least, can be striven for by constant approximation. "36 This 
possibility i~ treated as if it were self-evident. However, it poses "one of the 
most important problems of possibility and involved therein is the question of 
the justified, rational sense of this problem as such. "37 "The naivete of 
philosophies which have appeared historically consists in this plunge." They 
can certainly show the conditions for the possibility of objective knowledge of 
nature by means of their epistemology and, by means of this, understand, as 
Kant would say, what sort of light has dawned upon the natural scientists. 
However, these philosophies cannot exhibit [darstellen] the conditions by 
means of which this advance of 0 bjective science shows itself to be a historical 
formation and by means of which science understands itself in its historicity. 
For this to be achieved, "epistemology itself must become a historical inquiry 
back." Admittedly, "epistemology has never been seen as a particularly 
164 
historical task. But this is precisely what we object to in the past. "JH 
Philosophy must bear in mind, then, the "total historicity of the correlative 
manners of being of humanity and of the cultural world. "39 
However, does the change of the historical world not engulf everything 
abiding and fixed? Is not every possibility of truth denied relative to this 
becoming, which nevertheless as truth should be a universal and universally 
binding truth, capable of being understood by every rational being? 
With this question, the problem posed by the method of the 
phenomenological science of the a priori of the life-world is presented. The 
question includes all of the difficulties which emerge in connection with this 
problem of method, and the difficulties place the inquiry on the path towards 
their solution. At the same time, the question concerning the ultimately 
grounding, phenomenological science of transcendental subjectivity is 
implicitly posed in a new way that surpasses Husserl's earlier understanding 
of what this science is. 
III. THE METHOD FOR ACQUIRING THE A PRIORI OF 
THE LIFE-WORLD. ITS DIFFICULTIES AND THE PATH 
TOWARD THEIR SOLUTION 
The task posed for the phenomenological science of the a priori of the life-
world has emerged as follows. This science must certainly make use of the 
intuitively obtained information provided by the empirical, historical science 
of the forms of human cultural worlds. However, it cannot restrict itself. as 
does the historian, to describing the defacto course and change of history with 
its succession of always new forms of human culture and to searching 
descriptively for what is common and different in them. For such a search for 
common structures would only obtain empirical generalities but not that 
which, in unconditioned universality, makes history as such and the changes 
of its forms possible. The phenomenological science, therefore, must go 
beyond the/luxating aspect of history, in which nothing is fixed and abiding 
and in which all cultural worlds are, as horizons of life, relative to those who 
live in them. It must do so by means of a reflection on the conditionsfor the 
possibility of this relativity laid down by transcendental subjectivity, a 
relativity within which even objective science with its claim to truth is only a 
relative, historical formation. For "every history of facts remains 
incomprehensible because, as always merely drawing its conclusions naively 
and straight-forwardly from facts, it never makes thematic the universal basis 
of sense upon which such conclusions rest, has never investigated the immense 
structural a priori which is proper to it" as the "concrete, historical a priori 
which encompasses everything that exists as having become and coming to be 
or exists in its essential being as tradition and handed down. "40 
165 
However, how can this historical a priori be disclosed methodically? Its 
disclosure requires that one go beyond the way in which Husserl had earlier 
investigated the essential correlation between constitutive accomplishments 
and accomplished, constituted being: "the phenomenology developed at first 
is merely static; its descriptions are analogous to those of natural history, 
which concern particular types and, at best, arrange them in their systematic 
order. "41 The investigations of this phenomenology remain, then, within the 
correlation between eidetic forms, the eide of the constituted entities and the 
constituting accomplishments essentially correlative to them. As a result, the 
entities which this first phenomenology investigates with respect to their 
essence and their eidetic distinctions are pregiven to phenomenology as 
mundane entities, as entities appearing within the horizon of the world. By 
means of such static distinctions pertaining to entities according to their 
eidetic genus, however, the first phenomenology does not catch sight of the 
horizon of their appearing, the world, and the accomplishments which 
constitute this horizon of the world. For "there is a fundamental difference 
between the way we are conscious of the world and the way we are conscious 
of things." We are in principle always conscious of things and objects as 
objects within the world-horizon. We are conscious of this horizon only as "a 
horizon for existing objects, and the horizon cannot be actual without 
particular objects." Therefore, the world does "not exist as an entity but, 
rather, exists with a singularity for which a plural makes no sense. Every 
plural and every particular drawn from a plural presupposes the world-
horizon. "42 However, if the world-horizon is in fact the horizon of world 
history as the history of the one world, then every static determination and 
conception of the correlation between eide and the corresponding constituting 
functions presupposes history and its a priori. Therefore, the question of the 
method for disclosing this historical a priori arises. 
What is obviously required for such a reflection that goes beyond static 
phenomenology is that the reflecting subjectivity itself must go beyond 
historical change to an a priori that makes history possible. However, "does 
this not apply to all science. no matter how different its particular 
characteristics may be, and thus, to all truth in the scientific sense, as science's 
guiding ideal? Does science not arise from an idealization which is itself in the 
historical sphere, does it not presuppose the a priori of history, which itself 
arises from an idealization?"43 
By this, it is determined that all a priori, as the condition for the possibility 
of science, including the science of historical being, rests on an idealization. 
The concept of idealization in the passage just cited, (which was taken from a 
manuscript now included as an appendix to the text of the Crisis), has a 
broader and more fundamental significance than in the original essay on the 
crisis, where it was used to characterize the method of modern natural science. 
With this expanded concept of idealization Husserl poses the fundamental 
166 
problem posed by an a priori of history. In his book, Lebensphilosophie und 
Phiinomenologie, (1930),44 Georg Misch had criticized Husserl several years 
prior to the Crisis for seeking to bring, in a completely Platonic manner, the 
flux of history to a halt by means of the idea of flowing. Is it not the case that, 
on the one hand, the "Heraclitean flux," this correlation between the historical 
world-horizon and the subjectivity constituting it and, on the other, the eidetic 
concept of this flux, which is an "idealization," are irreconcilably opposed?45 
It is apparent from the passages quoted that Husserl was not blind to this 
consideration. In fact, this consideration was developed by him as the very 
difficulty whose resolution includes the solution to the problem posed by a 
historical a priori, and this is the a priori of the life-world as the historical 
world. This a priori, with regard to the empirical science of history, is not only 
the total concept of the conditions for the possibility of a pre-scientific 
experience of history but of the conditions for the possibility of an empirical 
science of history as well. For "every historical inquiry and demonstration, in 
the common sense of historical, presupposes history as the universal horizon 
of inquiry. "46 The question is, then, what makes it possible that our life-world 
has this horizon of history, that our life-world is the historical world? 
How is this difficulty resolved by Husserl and what questions remain open 
in the sense of not being answered? 
It is resolved by means of the inquiry into the "primal evidences" which are 
acquired and explicated by the reduction to transcendental subjectivity as the 
ultimate grounding SUbjectivity. In the reflections on "first philosophy," 
H usserl speaks of "absolute experience." This a priori of history is, 
accordingly, not a realm of ideas located somewhere in a world behind the 
world, not a realm of "innate" ideas or root concepts of pure reason, 
demonstrable by means of the Kantian "regressive" analysis. Rather, it is the 
domain of the innermost self-experience of reflecting transcendental 
subjectivity. 
What is the nature of the a priori of history which is experienceable in the 
passage back to these primal evidences? It is the temporal structure of the 
ultimately constituting subjectivity which constitutes itself as temporal, as a 
Heraclitean flux. This constitution takes place in the "living present." 
Therefore, "what is historically primary in itself is our present. We always 
already know of our present world and that we live in it, always surrounded by 
an openly endless horizon of unknown actualities. This knowing, as horizonal 
certainty, is not something learned, not knowledge which was once actual and 
has merely sunken back to become part of the background. The horizonal 
certainty had to be already there in order to be capable of being explicated 
thematically; it is already presupposed in order that we can seek to know what 
we do not yet know. Every not-knowing concerns the unknown world, which 
nevertheless exists in advance for us as the world, as the horizon of every 
inquiry in the present and, thus, for every specifically historical inquiry as 
167 
well .... Accordingly, we need not first discuss critically the facts which the 
historian validates; simply the claim of their factuality is sufficient to show 
that, if the claim is to have sense, the historical a priori is presupposed. "47 
What, then, is the nature of the primal evidence which transcendental 
SUbjectivity, my I with its experience of the world and my experience of the 
historical horizon of the world, discloses? Primal evidence is not the mere 
experience of a pure facticity. "The propositions in which it (the world-
horizon) is expressed must be fixed and be capable of being made evident 
again and again. Through what method do we obtain a universal and, hence, a 
fixed a priori of the historical world, an a priori that is always the most 
original? Whenever we consider it, we find ourselves, and so find ourselves 
evidently, to have the capacity to reflect, to turn to the horizon and penetrate it 
by explicating it. We also have, and know that we have, the capacity 
to freely imagine and phantasize our human, historical existence and 
what is explicated therein as its life-world to be otherwise. And precisely by 
this free variation and phantasizing it to be otherwise, an essentially universal 
set of elements stands out with apodictic evidence ... as the essence always 
implicit in the flowing, living horizon. "48 
This means that the conditions for the possibility of having a world as a 
historical world are not only the accomplishments of the sensory-perceptual 
constitution of a natural world, but are also the accomplishments of the 
temporal self-constitution of transcendental subjectivity, accomplishments by 
which each living present is a present with its "comet tail" of the past which is 
sinking back and with an open horizon of the future. They are, thus, the 
conditions for the possibility of having a world with its traditions; therefore, 
of having a historical world. These accomplishments can remain anonymous. 
Access to the basis for our having this world-horizon can be concealed or 
blocked. However, this horizon can never be lacking, for without it our world 
would no longer be a world as the potentially universal human world with its 
unconditioned possibility for communication. 
Therefore, the primal evidence of the self-experience of transcendental 
subjectivity does not simply include the becoming aware of its own facticity as 
the Heraclitean flux. In addition, it includes the evidence of the it-could-not-
be-otherwise as the condition for the possibility of having a world as a 
historical world, so that every "establishment of a historical fact that lays 
claim to unconditioned objectivity likewise presupposes this invariant or 
absolute a priori. "49 By means of this insight, we stand, as Husserl says, before 
the "most profound problem-horizon of reason, the same reason which 
functions in every man, the animal rationale, no matter how primitive he is." 
That is, facticity of every type has "a root in the essential structure of what is 
universally human, through which a teleological reason running throughout 
all historicity manifests itself. "50 This a priori of history is to be distinguished 
from the objective-logical a priori, for it is an a priori which has itself come to 
168 
be historically, an a priori derived from the predictions arising from the 
projects of natural life. The a priori of history is the concept of the invariant 
style5l of life-world existence. This style is based upon induction. However, 
statements about this a priori are not themselves acquired by induction but, 
rather, are eidetic statements having unconditioned universality. 
To what extent is the flux, which is necessary, understood as a flux and not 
once again brought to a halt by the idea of flowing? Husserl himself stated that 
every comprehension of an a priori is an idealization. He gives no answer 
which would weaken this objection. However, there are hints in his 
discussions as to where the answer to this question would have to begin and 
hints as to the task which the "ultimate logic" which was demanded by 
Husserl, the logic of the disclosure of transcendental subjectivity itself as 
opposed to "world-logic," must have. 
This a priori is acquired by a reflection on the ultimately grounding ego and 
its primal evidences as primal experiences. This I is "indeclinable" and is in 
fact called "I" by an equivocation, as we learned earlier. This indeclinability is 
obviously nothing other than what Heidegger termed "mineness" [Je-
meinigkeit]. It signifies a singularity that lies beyond the difference between 
logical universality, a universality always acquired by idealization, and 
individual particularity which is subsumable under universality. Therefore, in 
order to grasp essentially the ego's constituting functions, the a priori of 
history, and the life-world as the historical world, as the world known 
immediately and ultimately, the problem of the mediation of the individual 
particular by the universal is dissolved, a dissolution in which Eley saw the 
"crisis of the a priori. "52 Hints as to how the crisis of the a priori can be 
overcome are to be sought in Husserl's remarks regarding the grounding ego. 
A mediation is superfluous because, in its indeclinability, ultimately 
grounding subjectivity is beyond the dialectic of the one and the many, as is its 
correlate, the world constituted in SUbjectivity. This subjectivity, in its 
singularity, implies in itself the one world common to everyone and, thus, to 
humanity. Thus, subjectivity reveals itself in the reflection on its ultimately 
constituting accomplishments to be, as it were, the immediacy which mediates 
itself. 
But in what way has subjectivity revealed itself by this? The answer which 
Husserl gives to this question must be made more precise by a critical 
examination. Husserl himself indicates that the concepts of the invariant 
structures in all of the historically changed worlds which can be understood as 
worlds belonging to our world, concepts which express the a priori conditions 
for the possibility of having a world, are derived from an idealization, as is any 
a priori. This means, however that these concepts form a projection that is not 
complete but, rather, that must be transcended in its acquisition. The one 
reason, therefore, cannot be characterized as a totality of what can be 
comprehended in the world, as the possession of an abiding, available set of 
169 
concepts which make this totality possible. It is intentional reason which, as 
intention, is always ahead of itself and transcending itself. The a priori is 
something invariant; however, it is not exhausted when it is comprehended, 
for if this were the case, it would be brought to a halt. However, since this a 
priori itself is the Heraclitean flux, the reason which comprehends it, which is 
the reason of the de facto, reflecting subjectivity in its indeclinability, must 
transcend itself in its comprehending. 
It seems to me that the resolution of the difficulty in the a priori of history is 
already outlined in Husserl's concept of intentionality and in the idea that 
history and its teleology begins with a still empty, primal intention,S3 an 
intention from which ensues the intentional reaching out towards a still 
undetermined, open horizon that is filled in only progressively in the process 
of becoming. However, this filling, which itself opens up the new horizon of 
transcendental life, is not the realization of a possibility that already exists "in 
itself" and that can be established a priori - the establishment of which could 
only be in terms of absolute spirit, as Hegel saw. Rather, it is a possibility 
primarily as possibility caught sight of and grasped. If the metaphysical 
relation of the a priori to a constant world of ideas, to a divine intellect or to an 
absolute spirit is set aside by the reduction, then so is the idealized concept of 
possibilities which exist "in themselves" and become "for themselves" once 
realized. As a result, the Hegelian problem of the mediation between the 
unconditioned universality of the a priori and its constitution in de facto 
transcendental subjectivity is dissolved. Only the direction of the aim 
predelineated by the primal intention is fixed, a direction that, however, is 
open-ended. Phenomenological reason is not one limited by a fixed a priori 
that is to be objectified but, rather, is an open reason. Hence, it does not 
comprehend itself and its ground "theoretically" (by logical idealization or 
objectification). Rather, its possibility only becomes a possibility by its being 
taken up in its "purposiveness" [Willentlichkeit]; that is, by being 
appropriated and realized and, hence, in the exercise of its freedom. In the 
exercise of its freedom, transcendental subjectivity becomes acquainted with 
that which both grounds and makes possible the style of its life. Its a priori 
possibilities for a teleological unfolding are not possibilities in themselves but, 
rather, possibilities only grasped in "absolute experience." The possibilities 
are constituted as such by transcendental subjectivity's accomplishment. 
However, the instance, which affords transcendental subjectivity this style of 
constituting ability and which cedes its freedom, the ground of its being, is 
"experienced" only in the exercise of freedom and cannot be comprehended 
"theoretically" by abstracting from this exercise of freedom. Accordingly, 
there is a connection between the theoretical unknowability of freedom 
(Kant), the theoretical unknowability of its ground and the inability-to-be-
objectified, and the inability-to-be-idealized of the innermost life-world a 
priori, understood as the style pertaining to the structure of change within the 
170 
world-horizon in its undetermined openness, an openness within which 
constituting subjectivity is at any given time situated de facto. Thus the filling 
of the primal intention of rational subjectivity occurs only in its experience, in 
the "experiment" which is ventured. 
Thus, the root of overcoming the traditional opposition between the a 
priori and the empirical-historical rests in such an understanding of the 
essence of intentionality. The unconditionedly universal structure of the 
subjectivity which constitutes the life-world, its "purposiveness" (Husseri), 
would then be intentionality in the sense of "being-already-ahead-of-itself" 
(transcendence in the sense' of Heidegger) and would be unable to grasp itself 
in this structure in an objectifying reflection. This is the possibility of a 
resolution of the difficulty posed by an a priori of history which arises as a 
consequence of Husseri's formulations. However, Husserl obviously did not 
apprehend it, because his theory of reflection stood in the way. That, however, 
cannot be discussed here. 54 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
'Cf. E. Husserl, Erste Philosophie (EP). 
bThis essay forms the first two parts of the work now entitled Crisis. For 
information regarding the composition of this text, see Carr's introduction to 
the English translation, pp. xvi ff. 
AUTHOR'S NOTES 
I. 
E. Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental 
Phenomenology [References to the English translation will be indicated by an 
"E," those to the German text by a "G." Where a reference only to the German 
text appears, the particular appendix has not been included in the English 
translation. Unless otherwise noted, Carr's translation will be used, though 
minor changes required by the context in which a passage is quoted will be made.] 
2. 
Ibid., E - p. 351, G - p. 364. 
3. 
Ibid., E - p. 123, G - p. 125. 
4. 
Ibid., E - p. 123. G - p. 126. 
5. 
Ibid., E - p. 142, G - p. 145. 
6. 
Ibid., E - p. 50, G - p. 50. 
7. 
Ibid., E - p. 50, G - p. 51. 
8. 
Ibid., G - p. 441. 
9. 
Ibid., E - p. 51, G - p. 51. [Landgrebe inserted "and mean" following "genuinely 
see," which does not appear in the German text. Where Landgrebe's citation 
varies from the original text, the latter will be used.] 
10. 
Ibid., G - p. 449. 
II. 
Ibid., E - p. 51, G - p. 51. 
12. 
Ibid., G - p. 466; also E - pp. 130-31, G - p. 134. 
171 
13. 
Ibid., p. 466. 
14. 
Ibid., E p. 51. G - p. 51. 
15. 
Ibid., E p. 131, G - p. 133. 
16. 
Ibid., E - p. 124, G - p. 127. 
17. 
Ibid., E - p. 127, G - p. 130. 
18. 
Ibid., E - p. 128, G - p. 130. 
19. 
Ibid., E - p. 128, G - p. 131. 
20. 
Ibid., E - p. 129, G - p. 132. 
21. 
Ibid. 
22. 
Ibid., E - p. 129, G - p. 131. 
23. 
Ibid., G - p. 465. 
24. 
L. Landgrebe, Phiinomenoiogie und Geschichte (Giitersloh: G. Mohn, 1967), 
pp. 169 ff. 
25. 
Husserl, Crisis, E . p. 122, G - p. 124. 
26. 
Ibid., E - p. 175, G - p. 179. 
27. 
Ibid., E - p. 156, G .. p. 159; also E .. p. 177, G p. 181. 
28. 
Ibid., E .. p. 147, G .. p. 150. 
29. 
Ibid. 
30. 
Ibid. [Our translation.] 
31. 
Ibid., E .. p. 149, G .. p. 152. 
32. 
Ibid., G - p. 500. 
33. 
Ibid., G - p. 501. 
34. 
Ibid., E .. p. 272, G .. p. 317. 
35. 
Ibid. [Landgrebe's reference to the Crisis, G .. p. 302, is incorrect.] 
36. 
Ibid., G .. p. 491. 
37. 
Ibid. 
38. 
Ibid., E .. p. 370, G .. p. 379. 
39. 
Ibid .. E .. p. 369, G .. p. 378. 
40. 
Ibid., E - p. 371-72, G .. p. 380. 
41. 
E. Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, E .. p. 76, G .. p. 110. 
42. 
Husserl, Crisis, E .. p. 143, G .. p. 146. [We have altered Carr's translation to 
conform with Landgrebe's development of the "singularity" ofthe world, below.] 
43. 
Ibid., E .. pp. 350-51, G .. p. 363. 
44. 
G. Misch, Lebensphilosophie und Phanomenoiogie(Philosophischer Anzeiger, 
3 + 4: Berlin, 1929 + 30). 
45. 
L. Landgrebe, Phon. und Geschichte, p. 17. 
46. 
Husserl, Crisis, E .. p. 373, G - p. 382. 
47. 
Ibid., E .. p. 374, G .. p. 382. 
48. 
Ibid., E - p. 374, G .. p. 383. [Our translation.] 
49. 
Ibid., E - p. 377, G .. p. 385. 
50. 
Ibid., E - p. 378, G .. p. 386. 
51. 
Ibid., E .. p. 181, G .. p. 185. 
52. 
L. Eley, Die Krise des A Priori in der transzendentalen Phiinomenologie 
Edmund Husserls. Phaenomenologica, 10 (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1967). 
53. 
Husserl. Crisis, G .. p. 393. 
54. 
Landgrebe, Phon. und Geschichte, pp. 192 ff. 
NOTES ON THE FIRST PART OF EXPERIENCE AND 
JUDGMENT BY HUSSERL* 
JEAN WAHL 
This posthumous book I is clearly opposed to what had appeared to be 
H usserl's theories in Ideas and in the Cartesian Meditations. From the first, a 
realist affirmation seems to predominate: " ... if the striving for knowledge is 
directed toward the existent, if it is the effort to formulate in ajudgement what 
and how the existent is, then the existent must already have been given 
beforehand ... that it can become the object of a judgement."2 What Husser! 
called the discourse of evidence signifies nothing other than, " ... self-
givenness, the way in which an object in its givenness can be characterized 
relative to consciousness as 'itself-there,' 'there in the flesh' .... "3 There are, 
then, for him, evidences which do not lead back to the apodictic evidence of 
classical logic. 
This will, then, lead us to affirm a pre-predicative evidence behind, or 
rather, beneath predicative evidence. 4 
It is possible to find in this the origin and first formulation of one of 
Heidegger's ideas, namely that logical truths have their foundation in a more 
fundamental truth, and that their pretention to validity in itself must be 
questioned. In their application, they have reference to a wor!d of 
substrates. S 
What we have said not only obtains for categorialjudgements, but also for 
what could be called their modalization, for example, judgements of 
resemblance, judgements which are presented in the mode of as (f,judgements 
of phantasy. 
At this point, a question may occur to the reader of Husser!, one which 
Husser! himself formulates. Even if one extends the evidence of experience in 
the way which is proposed, doesn't the evidence of judgement seem better. 
doesn't it seem that it is to this that the ideas of knowledge and cognition [de 
savoir et de connai.l'sance] apply in their proper sense? What can the turn from 
the domain of episteme toward the domain of doxa, that is, of vague 
*Translated by Laurence E. Winters from "Notes sur la premiere partie de 
Erfahrung und Urteil de Husserl," Revue de metaphysique et de morale, 56, no. 1 
(1951), pp. 6-34. 
172 
173 
experience, and, as it is said, of deceptive appearance, mean? Isn't the 
predicative judgement the core of cognition, of authentic evidence, and 
doesn't this pre- or ante-predicative evidence have inferior value? What could 
be the significance of a theory of the origin of judgement which draws its 
evidence from a dimension which is of evidently lesser value? How can the 
better be explained through a turn to that which is less than it?6 
Nevertheless, it is necessary to maintain that intellectual apprehension is 
always preceded by affection which, moreover, is never the fact that an 
isolated object affects us.? We note here an apparent divergence from what 
Husserljust said, and what he says four pages before when he asserted that the 
substrate of judgement could only be an individual object, and maintained a 
nominalist theory, according to which even the most primordial generality 
always refers to an act by which a plurality of individuals is assembled.8 But 
here, going beyond the sphere of judgement, he tells us that, unlike judgement, 
which, in the end, is always applied to individuals, affection always stands out 
from an environment which is the domain of the pregiven, that is to say, from 
what is already there as the passively pregiven, without the assistance of the 
apprehending gaze, and without the awakening of an interest. This domain of 
the passively pre given is presupposed by all cognitive activity; and we see, 
thus, that the passive doxa is prior to episteme, and gives to us, pre-gives to us, 
the object in a unity of passive doxa. 9 
We are able to go from there to the idea of "world" which is the ground on 
which all cognitive activity develops, and which, from the first, signifies, 
H usserl tells us, " ... a ground of universal passive belief in being which is pre-
supposed by every particular cognitive operation." "The being of the world in 
totality is that which is not first the result of an activity of judgement but which 
forms the presupposition of all judgement. Consciousness of the world is 
consciousness in the mode of certainty of belief."10 "The world as the existent 
world is the universal passive pregivenness of all judicative activity, of all 
engagement of theoretical interest. "11 Thus H usserl, who in the Ideas and in 
the Cartesian Meditations brought to light, quite particularly, the activity of 
the mind, and who, in a general way, had proposed to place the world within 
brackets, here, to the contrary, sees being in the world as a fundamental trait 
of the human intelligence. 
It is true that, according to certain passages, it could be thought that if it is 
thus, it is because cognition had already begun to do its work; that is, he tells 
us, the reason why we appear always to know more than what reaches our 
cognition. Thus, we have a sort of pre-cognition of the thing. It is an 
indeterminate, or imperfectly determined, pre-cognition, but is never 
completely empty. But we must see that this cognition has already taken place 
within the world. 12 
We must, as well, take account of the fact that everything which has been 
said holds not only for the world of pure and simple sense experience, for 
174 
nature pure and simple, but also, mediately, for everything that is 
"mundane," that is, for men and animals as subjects of the world, for cultural 
goods, for tools and everything which we utilize, for works of art, etc. For 
everything which has its place, mediately or immediately, in the spatio-
temporal sphere: "Everything is here or there, and its place is determinable," 
similarly, time, by physical instruments. It is thus that everything non-
sensuous participates in the sensuous, and is an existent which stands out from 
the world, "existing in the one spatio-temporal horizon. "13 
Everything which has been said points to a primordial apprehension which 
is ultimate and originary.14 If we now consider what conclusions may be drawn 
from this concerning judgement, we will see that what has been said of the 
foundation of predicative evidences in ante-predicative evidence, holds 
generally for the geneology of logic; the evidences of the logician himself have 
their sensuous foundation. IS 
But let us precisely return to this idea of a turn to a world which is the 
universal ground of all particular experiences, and which is the world of 
immediate experience, prior to all logical performance. Thus, what must be 
brought about, is the return to the "life world" (Ie monde vital). That is, to the 
world in which we always and already live, and which will be the foundation of 
all accomplishments of cognition and of all scientific determinations. The 
experience will be an experience of the world. 16 
But, in fact, it will be very difficult to rejoin this fundamental world. For it 
has been, in a way, decreed by our understanding that the space and time of 
our ordinary world are identical with the space and time that the 
mathematico-physical science of nature takes as its task to determine. 17 That 
is to say, that the world of our experience is interpreted with the assistance of 
an "idealization" which we do not see as already an accomplishment of our 
cognitive methods, which are, in their turn, founded on the pre-givens of our 
immediate experience. But this immediate cognition does not know any 
exactly determined space, time, or objective causallty.18 We have taken as 
constitutive of reality, as actual being, what is nothing but a method. 19 
And yet we now see that the domain of doxa is not one of less dignity than 
that of episteme, but it is the domain of ultimate primordiality, and that exact 
cognition is only a methodJo 
Let us add once again that this primordial domain is not only the 
foundation of the theoretical, and is itself not only theoretical, but also 
contains the experiences of action and of sentiment, experiences in the mode 
of-willing, of valuation, and of practical action, which also have their horizons 
of familiarity.21 These diverse modes are more essential to primordial 
experience than the mode of cognition and judgement, and the idea of 
primordial experience applies even more to them.22 
To go toward the ultimate and originary evidences of pre-predicative 
experiences, we must turn from founded experiences toward pure and simple 
175 
experiences.23 We will, thus, go toward the purely affective pre-given of the 
passive "belief in being," toward sensations as they happen to us, without 
elaboration and even without attention on our part.24 Here, already, we will 
apprehend "unities of identity" which are pre-given, and passively pre-
constituted; which do not, in themselves, contain any predication, and which 
will later be apprehended by virtue of predication, as explicit, identical 
unities.25 
A question still remains, namely, to what extent is there passive pre-
givenness, and to what extent is there pre-constitution of objects? Up to this 
point, Husserl says, all passive consciousness is always and already 
constitution of objects, or, more exactly, pre-constitution. Without doubt, it 
is only the activity of objectification, the activity of consciousness which is not 
pure passive doxa, which creates the objects of consciousness and of 
judgement. But it seems correct that within the passive doxa, one may uncover 
what could be called an activity of pre-cognition. 26 
Now, if we take account of the fact that this doxa is also practical and 
evaluative, grasping things as amusing, useful, etc ... prior to arriving at pure 
theoretical interest, we see that the I, living concretely within its environing 
world ( Umwelt) , given over to its practical goals, is by no means ultimately a 
contemplative, or attentive I. For the I, in its concrete life world, the 
consideration of the existent is an attitude which it is able to take up 
occasionally and provisionally, while not giving it a special privilege.27 
We have said that perception as such presupposes that something is always 
and already pre-given to us, and towards which, in perception, we must direct 
ourselves. Let us add that what is pre-given is not only isolated, particular 
objects, but there is always a field of pre-givenness in which the particular 
stands OUt.28 It is this field which we must take up through an admittedly 
abstractive process.29 
Husserl proceeds here to a phenomenological analysis of attention, as an 
inclination toward an intentional horizon, a tendency which always moves in 
advance toward ulterior determinations,30 toward a "plus ultra," 
continuously, without end. 3l There is a continual enrichment of the given, a 
tendency to view it in all its aspects;32 but it is urgent here to note two points; 
first, that the beginning of the act is the consciousness of being next to the 
object itself; perception is the consciousness of the grasping of the object in its 
corporeal presence, so to speak.33 In the second place, the object remains the 
same, and the successive appearances are the appearances of the same object. 
It is a question of bringing the object, with all of its sides, to givenness.34 We 
know, in fact, that the side of an object which we see is only a side in so far as 
there are sides which are not seen.35 Perception directs itself toward an 
identical object which is presented in all its appearances. 36 
The act of attention is accompanied by kinesthetic acts which are activities, 
although not voluntary ones.J7 We must distinguish here, in a general way, 
176 
actions which are not actions of an ego, which are prior to the act in which 
attention is turned (toward the object), and other actions which are actions of 
the ego, without, however, being voluntary. It is thus that I involuntarily 
direct my eyes while I turn myself attentively toward the object. 38 
The object is thus given to me in what H usserl calls a "duration at rest," and 
the expression which he adds, "or changing," perhaps would have to be 
suppressed, since what he wishes to bring to light here is the identity of the 
object. 
He now analyzes more closely what he calls interest, a word which he 
translates at one point with "Dabeisein," being by [aupres de].39 The interest 
which is in question here, is not that which gives birth to goals, and to 
voluntary actions; it is only a moment of the effort which belongs to the 
essence of normal perception.40 Husserl attaches such importance to the study 
of this interest because he sees in it the effort which, once it attains the form of 
an authentic will, will become the will to knowledge. 41 
What he is now going to try to have us apprehend is the origin, within the 
pre-predicative sphere, of negation, and of the different modalities of 
judgement. "It thus appears that negation is not first the business of the act of 
predicative judgement but that in its original form it already appears in the 
pre-predicative sphere of receptive experience. "42 It is in the process of 
disappointment, of deception, that he uncovers the primary form of negation. 
We may add that, since negation is primarily deception, it implies something 
which is prior to it. "In its originality, negation presupposes normal, ordinary 
object-constitution, which we designate as normal perception, the normal, 
unobstructed execution of perceptual interest. It must be present in order to 
be able to be modified in its originality. Negation is a modification of 
consciousness which manifests itself as such in accordance with its own 
essence. It is always a partial cancellation on the basis of a certitude of belief 
which is thereby maintained, ultimately on the basis of the universal belief in 
the world. "43 Thus situation is first. 
Just as for negation, Husserl seeks within the ante-predicative sphere for the 
presence of the consciousness of doubt, and of the consciousness of 
possibility. These are phenomena, in the sense that phenomenology takes this 
word, which are present, like negation, within this sphere, and, originarily, 
have their home there.44 It is in hesitation that he finds their origin, as he found 
the origin of negation in deception. 
The question arises as to what comes before negation, and before 
possibility. For, in a certain way, the "yes," although it gives us the assurance 
of belief and of being, is, like the "no," a modification of the originary mode 
which is totally primordial, totally "un-modified." The originary mode is the 
most pure and simple certitude. 45 We must begin from there, and the theory of 
the modalities of judgement remains suspended in air when it is developed 
simply in relation to predicative judgement, as is the case in traditional logic, 
177 
and when the origins of the phenomena of modalization are not sought within 
the ante-predicative sphere. We reach the conclusion that the primordial form 
is the most pure and simple certainty of belief, and that all other phenomena: 
negation, consciousness of possibility, recovery of certainty through 
affirmation or negation, can only occur through a modalization of this 
primordial form.46 
Now let us study pure and simple apprehension, perception as immanent 
temporal unity. A first point which must be taken into account, and which, 
until now, has not been made evident, is the presence of our body. If we hear a 
musical tone, it is apprehended as sonorous within a proximity or at a spatial 
distance, as spatially localized: these determinations are related to a spatial 
zero point which is our body, in relation to which everything here, and 
everything over there is oriented.47 
In this first way, we see the tone as a unity of passively pre-given duration 
[duree].48 
There is an unity of the tone to which we orient ourselves. " ... we are not 
turned toward the momentary and yet continuously changing present (the 
phase sounding now) but through and beyond this present, in its change, 
toward the sound as a unity by which its essence presents itself in this change, 
in this flux of appearances. When we examine this more closely we see that the 
activity of apprehension is directed toward the sound which is presently vivid 
in such a way that it is apprehended as a sound which continuously endures as 
present. ... "49 
It would be interesting to compare Husserlian duration and Bergsonian 
"duree. " There is in both the same continuity, but the "now" has a greater role 
in the first: " ... the primary ray of apprehension of the ego traverses the 
central moment of the original now (toward the moment of the sound 
appearing in this form); and that is to say that it goes toward the now in its 
continuous transitional flux .... "50 Each moment becomes a past moment, 
then a past moment for the past moment. There is, he says, a flowing unity of 
activity. The same holds true for protention as for retention, for memory as 
for expectation. Thus, H usserlian duration seems to be more articulated than 
the Bergsonian "duree. "51 There is a series of individual apprehensions, of 
discontinuous steps which form the polythetic unity by means of which theses 
are unified. 52 
We proceed from this activity to an underlying passivity. In fact, Husserl 
says, the activity of the apprehension of the tone has a complicated 
architecture in virtue of, and on the foundation of the lawfulness of the living 
duration, prior to all activity, and residing within a natural passivity. He 
concludes from this that there is not only a passivity prior to activity, the 
passivity of the pre-constituting temporal current, but also a passivity which 
lingers above the first, which explicates and thematizes the objects, which 
belongs to the act not only as substructure, but as act, and which could be 
178 
called a passivity within activity. In this way, he adds, we can see that the 
separation between activity and passivity is not a fixed separation, that it is 
not a question, here, of terms which could be defined once and for all, but only 
of means of description and distinction, the sense of which, in each particular 
case, must be seen in the light of the concrete situation of the analysis; 
something which holds for all descriptions of intentional phenomena. 
It is by virtue of this passive-active apprehension that we are able, in a pure 
and simple perception, to grasp an enduring object, that is, what was, is, and 
will be. 53 
We now must reintroduce the idea of a horizon of familiarity, by virtue of 
which we understand not something completely new, in the continuation of 
our perceiving activity, but approximation and a correction of anticipations. 54 
We always orient ourselves toward an object. "This process is a developing 
contemplation, a unity of articulated contemplation. Through the entire 
process the S retains the character of theme; and while, step by step, we gain 
possession of the moments, the parts, one after another - and each one of them 
is precisely a moment or part, i.e., what is generally called a property or 
determination - each is nothing in itself but something of the object S, coming 
from it and in it. In the apprehension of the properties we come to know it, and 
we come to know the properties only as belonging to it. "55 "In the 
development, the indeterminate theme S turns into the substrate of the 
properties which emerge, and they themselves are constituted in it as its 
determinations. "56 We have here, thus, what could be called a sort of empirical 
deduction of the difference between substance and properties. H usserl 
expresses this well: "With this, we are at the place of origin of the first of the so-
called 'logical categories.' It is true, we can only begin to speak of logical 
categories in the proper sense in the sphere of predicative judgement, as 
elements of determination which belong necessarily to the form of possible 
predicative judgements. But all categories and categorial forms which appear 
there are erected on the pre-predicative syntheses and have their origin in 
them."57 
When Husserl comes to the study of the perception of pluralities, he will 
insist, similarly, on the role of passivity. Combination (Verbindung) does not 
come from activity, but has its source in passivity. 58 
From these diverse analyses, perception of unities, perception of pluralities 
of unities, he turns to the idea of familiarity and pre-cognizance. 59 But it is 
appropriate to add that, according to him, each new act of explication lays 
down what he calls a knowledge [un savoir], a habitual knowledge.60 
On the other hand, nothing is closed definitively. "Clarity, although it is 
always the fulfilling, the showing-itself, of what was previously prescribed in 
an empty way, meant in advance, is never a pure and simple giving of 
something itself, as if the prescription were able to proceed to the point that 
179 
the sense prescribed was already meant in advance in an absolute 
determination and only passed over into the intuitive clarity of the 'in itself.' 
Even where the object is 'completely familiar,' this completeness does not 
correspond to its idea. What is meant in advance in an empty way has its 
'vague generality,' its open indeterminateness, which is fulfilled only in the 
form of a more precise determination. "61 And, in so far as nothing is 
definitively closed, nothing has an absolutely precise outline. Merleau-Ponty 
will take up this tendency of the phenomenology of the later HusserI, when he 
rehabilitates the idea of indeterminateness in his study of perception.62 
Throughout this part of the book, H usserI qualifies the idea of the necessary 
intentionality of judgement, adding that it is a founded intentionality, 
founded, that is, on a sphere prior to judgement.63 
After having demonstrated the genesis of the distinction between substrate 
and determinations, Husserl shows that this distinction is, from the start, 
relative. "Everything that affects and is objective can just as well play the role 
of substrate as that of object-determination of explicate. And just as we can, 
continuously and at ever higher levels, make explicates independent and thus 
make them into substrates, 'substratize' them, in the same way we can also 
colligate every object, every autonomous substrate, with other objects, and 
then make the collection as a whole into a theme, enter into its members by 
explication, in this way exhibiting the whole by determining it, so that each of 
the formerly independent object-substrates henceforth acquires the character 
of explicate; or it can from the first be a collection, consisting of substrates 
independent in themselves, affecting us as a whole in the same way as an 
individual object."64 
But, having stressed the relativity of the distinction, we can see that beneath 
the relative distinction there is an absolute one. "With this, we come finally 
and necessarily to substrates which do not arise from sub stratification. In this 
context, they merit the name of absolute substrate. "65 An absolute substrate is 
designated by the fact that it is purely and simply recognizable, immediately 
apprehensible, and that its explication may immediately be brought to bear.66 
Among such purely and simply apprehensible substrates, Husserl tells us, 
there are, above all, the individual objects of external sensuous perception, 
that is, bodies. This is one of the decisive priorities of external perception, as it 
pre-gives the most originary substrates of experiential activities, which are 
later explicated by predication. 67 Thus, after establishing the relative 
character of the distinction, we come to see that beyond it there is an absolute 
distinction, since there are absolute substrates. These absolute substrates are 
bodies, and we may see here a phenomenological justification for empiricism. 
What has been said holds as well for a multiplicity of bodies, as a spatio-
temporal configuration, or as a causal totality. There is, again, something 
purely and simply experienceable in the specific sense which we have 
180 
described. For example, in the case of a machine, the pure and simple 
apprehension, by virtue of the intention which would perceive it, leads toward 
the determination of this multiplicity in its essential characteristics.6R 
Within this empirical domain (Erfahrungssphdre) which Husserl attempts to 
define and describe, there is no infinite divisibility. "In actual experience there 
is no division in infinitum, and, above all there is no experienceable plurality 
which, in the process of experience (for example, in drawing nearer), is 
resolved into ever new pluralities in infinitum. "69 
To return to the distinction about which we were speaking, there is, then, 
within the sphere of experience, a fundamental distinction between absolute 
substrates, which are the purely and simply experienceable, individual objects, 
and absolute determinations. " ... Everything capable of being experienced is 
characterized either as something for and in itself or as something which is 
only in another, in an existent for itself. Otherwise expressed: absolute 
substrates are those whose being is not that of mere determinations, those to 
which, therefore, the form of determination is non-essential, consequently, 
whose being-sense does not lie exclusively in this, that in its being another 
being 'is such.' "70 Absolute determinations are those which have the precisely 
contrary character. Absolute substrates are independent, absolute 
determinations are dependent. 
Now, each body is a body within a unique whole, which is ultimately that of 
the world, and consequently, we are able to direct ourselves toward the 
totality of the world as toward a theme of experience. 71 As Kant had seen, and 
whose teachings inspired Husser! here, though he does not mention him by 
name, the world is not experienced in the manner of a substrate, in pure and 
simple experience; the experience of nature as a totality is founded in prior 
individual experiences. But the world also is "experienced"; we are able, also, 
to direct ourselves to the world. Thus all substrates are bound together; and 
when we move about within the world as universe, no substrate is without real 
relation to others, to all the others, mediately or immediately,72 We are, thus, 
able to affirm that the world, from this point of view, is an absolute substrate, 
that is, everything is in it, but that it is not something which could be in 
anything else, it is not a relative unity within a larger multiplicity. It is the all-
existent, not within something, but "everything whatsoever." We may 
conclude from this that, " ... everything mundane, whether a real unity or a 
real plurality, is ultimately dependent; only the world is independent, only it is 
absolute substrate in the strict sense of absolute independence .... "73 
But this world is not an originary substrate in the sense that it would be able 
to become the simple theme of an apprehension of the first order (we translate 
the word schlicht by "of the first order"; Husser! opposed to this the word 
fundiert - founded - which we generally translate by: "of the second order"). 
We can say, thus, that the phenomenology of Husser! is distinguished from 
classical philosophy, of Descartes or Kant, for, after trying to place the world 
181 
within brackets, it is reintroduced in a central position, whereas Descartes had 
it intervene only after having demonstrated the existence of God, and whereas 
Kant put into question the very idea of world. But, we must add that for 
H usserl, as for Kant, the idea of the world as totality, cannot be grasped in an 
apprehension of the first order. 74 
Everything that we have seen so far was considered from the point of view of 
the analysis of the receptivity of external perception. It is from the point of 
view of this analysis that Husserl conclud~d that there is, ultimately, nothing 
grasped by an apprehension of the first order other than spatio-temporal, 
corporeal, individual things. 75 
]n the following, it is a matter, for him, of distinguishing what he calls parts 
and moments, emphasizing the idea that the whole is always more than the 
sum of its parts. 76 
Having studied the general structures of receptivity, and then, 
apprehension of the first order, Husserl moves on to the study of the 
apprehension of relations, and of the foundation of this apprehension within 
passivity. He leads us to see that if we wish to study what he calls the field of 
experience, we must take into account the entry of the gaze into the external 
horizon of the object, by virtue of which the environment of the object is 
thought. Henceforth, it is no longer a question of a thought which goes toward 
the interior, and only explicates the given, but, rather, of a thought which 
moves to the exterior, and forms relations. 77 
This horizon is constituted by a mUltiplicity of substrates, but this 
multiplicity itself is a mUltiple unity (Vieleinigkeit) of affection, constituted 
according to the laws which govern the field of passivity.78 
When we direct our gaze to an object, there is always present, in the 
bac.kground, its environment, which affects us at the same time, but less 
strongly, not reaching the ], and not constraining it to turn its attention 
toward it.79 
Moreover, we must take into account what Husser! calls the horizon of 
typical pre-cognition, in which each object is pre-given. "This typical 
familiarity co-determines the external horizon as that which always 
contributes, even though it is not co-present, to the determination of every 
object of experience. It has its ground in the passive associative relations of 
likeness and similarity ( Gleichheit. Ahnlichkeit), in the 'obscure' recollections 
of the similar. "80 N ow these relations, instead of remaining hidden as was the 
case in the example studied in the preceding chapter, can themselves be 
thematized. There may be activity which will place in relation the object given 
in perception with that which is given in memory. We come to a domain which 
is intermediary between the passive and active domains, which could be called 
the domain of active pre-constitution.81 
In conformity with what has been previously said, we find here, before all 
movement to predication, a difference between a passing interest, and the 
182 
more stable interest of a tendency to view the object within its situation and in 
its measure by reference to other objects.82 
We will now consider what relational contemplation is, and in what manner 
it assembles individuals into a collectivity. Husserlleaves aside the question 
whether it is passively founded, or if it is founded in an activity of the ego, and 
is only later founded in passivity. What he maintains is that the act of 
assembling objects, the act of adjoining objects to an object which serves as a 
starting place, is no longer relational contemplation, and is able, at best, to 
create the necessary presuppositions for it to arise. "Directly apprehending a 
plurality of objects by running through them successively only involves taking 
more and more objects together while those previously apprehended still 
remain in grasp, as when, for example, I successively run through the objects 
on the table: inkwell, book, pipe, penholder, etc., by letting my glance 'slide 
over them.' Without my actively taking these objects together in a specific act 
to form a set or number of objects, the preceding object still remains in grasp 
with each new apprehension, the consciousness of a plurality of objects run 
through is realized - but, for all that, nothing is apprehended of a relation 
which the one object may have to the others. ''83 
It is when interest intervenes that we come to apprehend the relation, and 
that we apprehend that the penholder is on the table; but without predicative 
form this remains momentary. Starting with the unity of the set in a 
consciousness, we come to apprehend the "to the side of," the "on the top of," 
as differences of thickness.84 
It is within this sphere of the pre-predicative that we will find the 
Jundamentum relationis. 85 
The unity about which we have spoken need not be thematic for relational 
contemplation to be engaged. Rather, we should say that it acts in a purely 
passive way, as a mutually affecting of all the objects which are pre-given in a 
consciousness, and makes possible, thus, the synthetic transition from the one 
to the other. To comprehend relational contemplation, we do not need to 
suppose that there was, from the outset, a gaze which attends the unity, and 
that the unity is, from the start, actively grasped. ". . . the relational 
determinations certainly appear as determinations of the substrates: it is the 
substrate which manifests itself as greater or smaller, etc.; but these 
determinations do not appear as attached to, or in, the unity between the two 
members of the relation, as would have to be the case if relational 
contemplation were an explication of the unit~. "86 
According to Husserl, we must rather say that the determinations of 
relations are made on the foundations of a pre-given unity which is, itself, not 
thematic; what is thematic is the object considered in this relative way. We 
grasp relative properties as attached to the object.87 Here it is possible to bring 
together phenomenology and the philosophies of Bradley and James, in their 
stress on a unity prior to judgement. 
183 
It is always this unity which H usserl studies in the following paragraphs .. He 
says that it is possible to have a unity of the "given in person" in perception. 
The unity is one of pre~given objects which simultaneously affect us. It is an 
unity of the simultaneity of the affective, which dwells, as originarily pre-
given, within a field of perception, affecting as one, with stimuli flowing from 
this toward the ego. "This unity of the field, on the basis of which any 
orientation of apprehension toward individual objectivities affecting us, as 
well as their explication and reciprocal putting-in-relation, is first possible, 
has been, up to this point, simply presupposed; and it has only been mentioned 
that these are achievements of the passive synthesis of time conscious-
ness .... "88 There is, then, a temporal structure of the passive field itself which 
is prier to all acts, and which constitutes the passive unity of the pre-givenness 
of the multiplicity of perceived things. We have thus come to see the passive 
temporal foundation of everything which has been said. 
We may conclude from this that a mUltiplicity, a simple co-existence of pre-
given, individual objects, is unified, bound together, not as a categorial unity 
produced in creative spontaneity, but as a unity of the same kind as that of an 
isolated individual. "Certainly, it is not itself an individual, but it has the basic 
phenomenological property of all simply given objectivities: namely, that it 
must be given originally and as a sensuous unity and that, for it, all active 
apprehension requires a unitary pregivenness of sensuousness. To be sure, 
what has already been preconstituted in passivity first becomes a theme only 
through active apprehension. Accordingly, the temporal form is not only a 
form of individuals, but it also has, further, the function of uniting individuals 
in a unity of connection. "89 It is the unity which lies at the foundation of the 
previously examined relations of juxtaposition, and, in a general way, of 
relations of spatial situation. "The unity of the perception of a plurality of 
individuals is thus a unity on the basis of a connecting temporal form. "90 
In a most precise manner, the time by which they are bound is not the 
SUbjective time of perceptions, but objective time, not only because the 
perceptions are simultaneous in an immanent way, and belong to a unique 
perception of multiplicity which includes them, but also because the objects 
which are signified by them as objective, are signified as enduring in an 
objectively simultaneous way.91 
We thus come to the idea of a unity of an objective whole.92 
But, in this way, we are led to go beyond the domain of the ever different 
individual, to which, from the start, our investigation was limited. Until this 
point, objects were thought as objects for me, as objects in a world which was 
only for me. But the consideration of objective time, which has now become 
inevitable if we are to fully comprehend the oppositions between perception 
and memory, on the one hand, and fantasy on the other, and the resultant 
differences, leads us to transcend the limits of this "being-only-for-me." 
Objective time, objective being, and all the determinations of the existent as 
\84 
objective, affirm a being which is not only for me, but also for others.93 We are 
thus led to assert, beyond individual consciousness, and objective time, our 
being with others. 
Beginning with this, we are able to study the separation of what is perceived 
and what is in memory, on the one hand, and, on the other, their union. First, 
let us consider their separation. Husserl says that it is asserted with good 
cause. IfI live in memory, I have an unity ofthe intuition of the memory. What 
is remembered is there before all comparison. before all separation, before all 
relation, and is something sensuous, intuited in its 110wing parts in an unique 
way, as closed in itself, as long as I live in the intuition of a continuous 
memory, as long as I do not jump from memory to memory. Thus, as in 
perception, there is a unity, the event which I perceived is intuited also in 
memory, in a unitary manner, although there would be, each time, only an 
extension of determinate time, intuited in its own way. There is, thus, the same 
principle of closure which was discovered in perception, operative in memory. 
It is dependent on the unity of temporal duration. It is an unity not only for 
thematization, but also for the impression within which the unity of the 
objectivity, multiple though it may be, is sensuously and passively pre-given. It 
is an image constituted in an originary way. This image, whether an image of 
perception, or of memory, is always for itself, and it is only the intentional 
horizons which give it a relation to objectivity, to the objective world of which 
it is apart. Y4 
Upon the foundation of these horizon intentions may occur what we could 
call a continuous running through in memory, moving from the past to the 
originary present, going from memory to memory.95. 
These unities of remembrance are separated from each other, and what is 
presented in them as sensuous unities, as objects, as relations, is always 
separate, and separate from what is presented in perception. If we compare 
memory and perception, we cannot say that the object of the one would be 
within the same spatial world as the object of the other, because they are no 
longer in the same time. 96 
Nevertheless, after having seen the differences, we must view the unity 
between the worlds of memory and of perception, for that which I remem ber 
exists in the same world as what I am looking at now. What I remember 
belongs to the same objective world as that which is given in my present 
perception. Even the world of the others, the world which they remember, and 
about which they give accounts, may be, without doubt, a different world than 
that in which we presently find ourselves; yet all these worlds of memory are 
pieces of a unique and identical, objective world.97 
Now this world, which is, in the most comprehensive sense, the life-world 
(Lebenswelt) for a humanity which is in possible communal understanding, is 
our earth, which encloses within itself all these environing worlds, with their 
185 
metamorphoses, and their pasts, since we have no knowledge of other stars 
which might be worlds for men who might live on them. Husserl remarks, 
moreover, that even if the objective world is identified with the Lebenswelt of 
humankind, as a comprehensive unity of possible understanding, one could, 
nevertheless, leave aside for the moment the problem of knowing how the 
world, as Lebenswelt of humanity, is connected to the objective world in the 
strong sense, that is, to the world in the sense of the physico-natural 
determination of nature. 98 
Husserl then attempts to determine the temporal foundation of the 
connection of representations. Here again, it is within the sphere of passivity 
that he believes that he must seek this foundation. 99 
On the other hand, he stresses the necessity of the constitution, or, rather, 
the self-constitution of an objective time which is formed amidst all the 
sUbjective times.lOo He distinguishes the objects of imagination from the 
objects of perception because the former lack an absolute temporal 
position. 101 It is upon the foundation of absolute temporal position that 
individuation, and the identity of the individual are possible.102 
We must again return to the sphere of passivity in order to explicate the 
union of perceptions and of memories, through the fact of association; 103 the 
similar recalls the similar. There is a partial, reciprocal connection within this 
sphere of passivity, and of the receptivity which is founded on it. Again, this is 
not a connection in the logical sense, in the sense of a spontaneous and creative 
consciousness, within which such a relation is constituted. lo4 
This is the same sort of consideration that is carried on when he comments 
that, between similars, there is already, passively constituted, a sensuous 
unity, a unity within the subconscious, which binds the different situations of 
actual intuitions, submerged in forgetfulness. Thus, through all the 
situations, and in accordance with all the likenesses and similarities, there are 
constant connections, and, " ... the 'awakening,' the calling to mind of the 
earlier, is only the vivifying of something which previously was already 
there."105 Thus, "All these occurrences of associative awakening and linkage 
take place in the domain of passivity without any participation by the ego. The 
awakening radiates from what is presently perceived; the memories 'r.ise up,' 
whether we will or no. "106 
There are, to be sure, cases where the I is able itself to perform the effort of 
remembering. Then, only fragments are present at first, which are not yet 
ordered with respect to earlier and later. Certain intermediary fragments 
could be missing, and it is only piece by piece that the ego will be able to 
revivify the memory, making present the intermediary fragments, until the 
entire process is before it. But this active memory is, itself, possible only on the 
foundation of associative awakening. Such awakening is always an event 
which is introduced passively: "The activity of the ego can provide only the 
186 
conditions for this .... 
"107 A comparison might be made between such 
passages, and what Marcel Proust taught us about the functionally lived-
experience of memory. 
To complete the study of ante-predicative experience, it is appropriate 
again, to study the relations of connection, the relations of reality or of fact, 
those that rest on a real bond, and, ultimately, on what is presented here and 
now. The unity which founds them is the unity of the actual connection in a 
time in which the bound representations have their absolute place. The liaison 
here is not founded in a repeatable essence, but in a time which is produced 
only once. It is the individual of becoming whichfounds, here, the relation. 108 
This holds as well for the order of spatial situation, which is, moreover, 
founded within the temporal order of individual objects. Space is the order of 
simultaneous individual things given sensibly, of material things. The 
individualizing moments, (and Husserl comments here that it is the here and 
now which individualizes, in the temporal form of the "at the same time'') are 
able to found a nexus. 109 
Certainly, when in place of isolated objects, I have the space which 
embraces them, and it is intuitively represented to me, I have a more; but I 
have full individuation only if I return to my here and now. It is only when I 
appeal to the here and now that I obtain (in spite of the lack of logical 
determination) the determinability necessary for individual intuition. I 10 
We must, moreover, always come back to the distinction between the 
passively founded unity of two objects, and what is apprehended in the 
receptivity which is founded on it, apprehended as likeness and similarity, 
and, to a still higher degree, what is constituted in spontaneous production, as 
a relation of resemblance properly speaking. I I I 
Comparison always, originarily, presupposes an identity, or a sensible 
resemblance, ". . . something operative in sensibility prior to any 
apprehending of particulars and bringing them into relation. "112 It is in 
returning to what is sensuously given that we are able to understand the birth 
of excitation, it is this sensuous given which awakens interest at its lowest 
level. I 13 
We must, moreover, indicate those perceptions which are still more 
elementary than those to which we have paid attention until now, and which 
Husserl calls absolute impressions. They occur on the basis of the members cf 
a relation which remains in the background. It is thus that we have absolute 
impressions of height, or of weight, which cannot be decomposed, and are 
given from the very first. 114 
In this first part, thus, Husserl ceaselessly invites us to seek the foundation 
of not ordinary perception, but of judgement, and of predication, in this 
passive, ante-predicative sphere. It is one of the merits ofthis book to cast light 
on that which is naturally hidden. 
187 
We are able to see in Experience and Judgment, more than in any other 
work of H usserl, the way in which the philosophy of Heidegger is connected to 
Husserlian phenomenology.ll5 This is the case not only with regard to the 
point which we have particularly brought to light, being in the world, but also 
in some other elements, such as the denial of self-evident truths, and the theory 
of truth. If what H usserl said is true, and if not only judgements of experience, but 
all possible evident predicative judgement, and even the judgements of the 
logician, with their apodictic evidence, are, in the final analysis, founded on 
experience, then there is no truth in itself which soars freely. Without doubt, in 
Heidegger, the denial of such truths in themselves would come, rather, from 
the affirmation of their bond with Dasein, while, in Husserl, it comes from 
their relation to experience. It is no less true that the Husserlian rejection 
prepares the way for Heidegger's.116 
On the other hand, the idea that the real presents itself, shows itself as it is, 117 
seems to be the origin of the Heideggerian idea of truth, which is, moreover, 
explicitly derived from phenomenology. " ... it is really only on the higher level 
that the confirmation of the existent, of its how and what, which constitutes 
the objectifying function of the judgement, becomes a confirmation to which 
we can return again and again and, as such, a permanent possession of 
knowledge. This is the level of the act of predicative judgement, the 
sedimentation of which is found in the declarative statement. "118 The truth is, 
thus, essentially, " ... the disclosure of determinations ... 
"119 within the 
domains of actions, and of theory. 
To mention a third point: what we are given in perception is not presented 
only as a detached given, but as belonging to types of being, as a thing, as 
Human; this is, no doubt, one of the origins, in Heidegger, of the idea of 
different types of being, and of regional ontologies. 120 
It is possible to find another starting point for a comparison between 
Heidegger and H usserl in their conception of form as non-a priori. " ... 'form' 
designates here the character which necessarily precedes all others in the 
possibility of an intuitive unity."121,-
Further, this form, the most universal, the form offorms, is for Husserl, as 
for Heidegger, time. 122 
We have already seen a sixth similarity between the two philosophers. This 
is their conception of the pre-predicative, to which both give so much 
importance. 
Finally, the role that the others, the world, and, in a sense, objectivity, play 
in their theories is similar. We will give only one example. "These cases will 
compel us to go a little beyond the domain of what is proper to oneself 
alone .... objective time, objective being, and all determinations of existents as 
objective certainly designate a being not only for me but also for others. "123 
Many questions come to mind in the exposition of these ideas of Husserl. 
IXX 
When he speaks of the goal of judgement as being something a-temporal,! 24 
doesn't this idea of a-temporality lead us beyond the phenomenological 
sphere, where he appears to wish that we remain? 
Doesn't the idea of the affirmation of the unity of the wor!d as totality of 
what can be validated in experience, which contains not only experiences of 
fact, but also possible experiences of phantasy, also seem to go beyond the 
frame of phenomenology?!25 There are two ideas here, that of totality, and 
that of possibility, which must be examined. Is there a totality of everything 
verifiable? Is there a possible world integrated in which is such or such 
phantasy? Aren't these ideas which go beyond pure experience? As does, 
similarly, the idea of the unity of our experience.!26 
A still more important point is the introduction of a transcendental 
subjectivity, analogous to that which intervened in the Ideas and in the 
Cartesian Meditations, and which he compares to the Cartesian ego.127 
Let us also note that whereas it is said in certain passages that we directly 
apprehend man, or living being, in other passages, this is attributed to a 
spiritual sense, which leads outside of what is simply experienceable in a 
sensuous way.m Husser! seeks pure and simple experiences beyond those 
experiences which he indicates as founded: "The world as it is always already 
pregiven entire in passive doxa, furnishing the ground of belief for all particular 
acts of judgement, is at bottom given in simple experience as a world of 
substrates apprehensible simply by sense. "!29 In our experience, as soon as we 
encounter animals and persons, cultural objects, whether these are 
instruments, useful tools, works of art, or whatever else, we no longer have 
simple nature; we ha\e gone beyond the domain of what is sensuously 
expressible purely and simply, we have an expression of our spiritual sense of 
being. DO According to him, at least in these passages, we must put out of 
function, place in brackets, all expression of this sort, and leave in play only 
sense perception. We must consider the world only as a world of perception, 
and abstract from everything which is comprised of familiarities and of 
determinations which do not have their origin in a purely perceptive attitude, 
but in an evaluative attitude, whether it be of the others or of oneself!3! 
Certainly, he recognized that we have here, in comparison to the concrete 
world, an abstraction, a voluntary neglecting of something which is there for 
me, and which remains there. On this point, it is none the less true that he 
comes to a conception of pure, universal nature, as in Galilean science,!32 
whereas certain of his other indications permit us to glimpse, or even to fully 
see, a totally different point of view. 133 
The abstraction does not stop here. We must also confine ourselves within 
the sphere of purely individual judgement, and abstract completely from the 
communicative function of judgement, from the fact that it always pre-
supposes a prior communication. There will only be objects which are objects 
for me.!34 
189 
Another line of questioning could concern the role that Husserl accords to 
activity in what appeared to be, from the start, the work of the passive doxa, if, 
here, one may speak of "work." " ... the perceptive contemplation of the 
pregiven sensuous substrate, is already an activity, a cognitive performance of 
the lowest level ... an act, and not a mere suffering of impressions. "135 It is, 
already, an "achievement of cognition," although of a lower level. 
Particularly in attention, there is, already, such an "activity of a lower 
level. "136 
This leads us to inquire whether, between activity and passivity, there is a 
difference in nature, or simply a difference of degree, "This 
phenomenologically necessary concept of receptivity is in no way exclusively 
opposed to that of the activity of the ego ... receptivity must be regarded as the 
lowest level of activity. "137 It could be asked whether it would not have been 
more fitting, at least to one of the tendencies of phenomenology, to view 
activity as a higher stage of passivity, or whether they must be kept separate. 
We again encounter the same problem concerning the activity of the ego, in 
the analysis of attention. Attention is considered as a specific act of the ego. 138 
"The ego lives in the cogito, and this gives to all the content of the cogito its 
distinct ego-relation. "139 
Concerning the origin of negation, we may question whether the genealogy 
which H usserl gives does not, itself, presuppose negation. If, in deception, we 
say that the object is not thus, but otherwise, doesn't the "not thus" 
presuppose negation? Doesn't the fact that a sensation, to which we are not 
attending, wins over another by its power to fulfill, give us the idea of 
negation, if we do not already have it?140 The suppression of the former sense 
by the latter is no longer sufficient for us here. Husserl tells us that what is 
immediately attained by the suppression, what carries the character of the not, 
is the color red, for example, to which we have attended, and its anticipated 
qualification of the "existent. "141 But, this is to admit right away, the idea of 
the not. Husserl would reply, it is true, that he does not presume, here, to 
explicate, but only to describe. 142 The description, however, is apparently 
insufficient, and, on the other hand, in reality, it is a genesis which he seems to 
wish to bring about. 
Concerning doubt and its origin, the first question which comes to mind is 
whether, phenomenologically, doubt is, as Husserl says, a mode of passage 
between affirmation and negation, an intermediary between them. 143 
A second question may be posed concerning doubt. What characterizes 
perception is what Husserl calls its bodily presence. But if we hesitate between 
one manner of qualifying perception and another (for example, is it a man, or 
a marionette?), do we say that there are two perceptions, each of which has the 
character of bodily presence successively? But what do we say of our 
perception before our hesitation? Husserl proposes that we must say then, 
that there is not only a mode of bodily presence, but, added to it, a mode of 
190 
value or being, so that to the bodily presence of each of the two successive 
interpretations, it wil be necessary to add a mode of value, which will be that 
of the questionable or of the criticizable. 144 
When passing to the study of the idea of substrate, Husserl asserts that 
there are substrates which do not arise through substratization, absolute 
substrates, and that multiplicity leads us to absolute unities, to ultimate bodies 
which are no longer in a configuration. '45 We may ask whether this is 
legitimate from a purely phenomenological viewpoint. Let us comment, 
moreover, that he said that, on the one hand, all finite substrates have the 
determinability of the being-in-something, and that this holds to infinity.'46 
But on the same page, he admits an absolute substrate, the world. How can 
this be, since we have seen that one is able to go from determination to 
determination infinitely? Isn't it necessary to say that the world exists prior to 
determinations, exists as that in which are all determinations, and is it not a 
matter of going from them to the world? And, in fact, from this perspective, it 
is possible to maintain Husserl's two assertions. 
But another question presents itself. It seems that he admits, beside the 
absolute of the world, another absolute, a real finite multiplicity, a 
mUltiplicity, he says, which is one qua reality, which is permanent, or at least 
persistent, within the causality of its transformations. How can he say, then, 
that only the world is independent, and, what becomes of the other absolute 
about which he speaks, at the bottom of the same page?" ... only the world is 
independent, only it is absolute substrate in the strict sense of absolute 
independence .... "147 
A new question may be posed concerning the very content of the idea of the 
world; in fact, the world of our experience, taken concretely, is not only the 
totality of nature; there are also within it, as Husser! notes, the others, our 
companions in humanity, as well as the things which do not have only 
natural determinations, but which are determined as objects of culture, as 
things molded by humanity, with their predicates of value, of utility, etc. 14X 
But, instead of saying, as we would expect, that the world of persons, of 
animals, and of cultural objects, is apprehended immediately as the external 
world, Husserl asserts, on the one hand, that we can grasp everything 
corporeal by a direct perception; but, on the other hand, when we encounter 
men, animals, or cultural objects, we no longer have simple nature, but what 
he calls an expression of the "spiritual sense of being." Then, he says, we are 
led beyond that which is experienceable by the senses. He maintains that the 
determinations, on the basis of which an existent is not only a natural body, 
but is determined, and experienceable as person, as animal, as cultural object, 
are determinations of a completely different order than the determinations of 
body as body. They are not at all perceived, in comparison to the thing, in a 
perception of the first order, as is a determination such as their color. 
Certainly, an existent which is not simply natural, but which is perceived as 
191 
person, as animal, or as cultural object, has its personal determinations; 149 and 
he adds that, with regard to these determinations, it is, itself, a substrate. 
But this last observation concerning the personality and the character of the 
substrates of the perceptions of the second degree, which seems to be 
supportable, does not eliminate what seems to us to be disputable in the 
separation which he just effected. Even if he said that these substrates have 
their independence, he adds that this independence is only relative, and that it 
is not an independence with regard to the objects of the first order, on which 
perception of the second order is founded. I50 
In this way we are brought back to the idea that substrates are only absolute 
in the sense of being originally experienceable in an originary experience of the 
first order, of being the individual objects of external sensuous perception, 
that is, bodies. I51 It is only in a broader sense that we are able to call 
objectivities of the second order, absolute substrates. I52 
Concerning the broadest concept of absolute substrate, which could be 
called the absolutely indeterminate something, the question is whether this 
concept can have any value within a theory which so completely separates the 
objects of the first and second orders; moreover, can't this completely 
indeterminate something be identified with the "this here" except if one admits 
the ideas that Hegel maintained in the Phenomenology ofMind?I53 
Later on, Husser! comes to the distinction between the relation subsisting 
between a thing and its surface, and the relation of a thing with its quality of 
being polished or rough. The surface, he says, is bound to the thing only 
mediately, through the intermediary of the idea of extension. I54 But, one 
might ask, aren't there more fundamental differences than those which he 
brings to light, between these two attributions of the thing? 
In the third chapter, we again encounter some of the presuppositions which 
have already been criticized: first, the idea that we start from a multiplicity of 
substrates which affect us simultaneously.I55 
Concerning this question of the plurality of objects which are taken as a 
point of departure, it may, most certainly, be observed that Husser! tells us 
that this multiplicity must be considered as a bound unity, similar to that of an 
isolated individual. I56 From this point of view, ifit is retrospectively applied, 
to the end of correcting the preceding passages, his descriptions would escape 
our criticisms. 
We have noted the difficulties which arise as a consequence of the 
separation between the active and the passive spheres of consciousness. I57 
Here we see that he interposes between the two, the sphere of active pre-
constitution.l58 
Where as he wishes to restrict himself, as far as possible, to the ante-
predicative sphere, and to what is given in person in perception, he recognizes 
that it will be necessary to go above these spheres.l59 
Idealist tendencies are seen equally when Husser!, here conforming to the 
192 
Kantian tradition, leads us to the idea of a unity of intuition, that, he declares, 
is larger than had been exposed until now, but which, nevertheless, entails an 
entirely idealist construction. 16o Similarly, he speaks further of a unity of lived 
experiences which constitute objectivities. 161 He is led to distinguish a time of 
lived experiences, which is different from the time of objectivities, which are 
the objects of their intentions. 162 As in Kantian philosophy, he must seek the 
condition of the possibility of all unity of intuition within the unity of the 
temporal intuition. 163 When he comes to the question of the foundation of 
formal relations, he sees it within a formal, ontological unity, which bears 
neither on a real connection of unified objects, nor on the essential moments. 
"It is a unity which extends to all possible objects, individual or not individual; 
it is the collective form of unity, that of assemblage. "164 
He comes, in this way, to the idea that everything is intuitable in a single 
consciousness, all the possible, which, moreover, includes all the real. This 
consciousness is the originary intuition, as possible, and as actual. Naturally, 
he adds, to make an object of the totality of the collection of things, is an 
accomplishment of a higher order, and not an accomplishment of 
receptivity, but of productive spontaneity. Although he adds that these formal 
relations would assume the accomplishments of predica tive thought, it is none 
the less true that we are in danger of losing all the precious acquisitions of 
ante-predicative realism which we have stressed, to a constructive idealism. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
'In the text. paragraph 82, page 32, Wahl's translation of Husserl's text (see 
footnote 121) changes the affirmation concerning "form" which is in the 
original, to a negation. We have rectified this. Whether or not this is a simple 
error, as the following paragraph suggests. or represents an unclarified moment 
in Wahl's interpretation, is not clear. 
NOTES TO THE TEXT 
I. The work was first printed in Prague, in 1939. and became unavailable 
until it was reprinted in 1948. It is appropriate to note that Experience and 
Judgment cannot, in its totality. be attributed to Husser!. The work is "edited 
and published" with the assistance of Ludwig Landgrebe. In 1928, H usserl asked 
Landgrebe to assemble and put in order a certain number of his manuscripts 
concerning the domain of transcendental logic. A course which was given by 
H usserl in 1919-20 furnished the starting point for this arrangement. Landgrebe 
also called on a group of older manuscripts (1910-14), and on some lectures of 
1920. H usserl reviewed and completed what Landgrebe had done. After the 
publication of Formal and transcendental Logic (1929), a second drafting was 
envisaged, which would take account, along with the manuscripts previously 
cited, of others dating from 1919-20, and of the Formal and Transcendental 
193 
Logic. But, given the diversity of the manuscripts, and their fragmentary 
character, a general revision became necessary, to the end of making the whole 
more homogeneous, of economizing the transitions, and of establishing a 
division into paragraphs and chapters. This revision was not accomplished by 
H usserl but by Landgrebe, and, what is most important, most significant, 
"where the analyses had only been indicated, it would be necessary to complete 
them." This was to be, again, the task of Landgrebe. But, we must also say that 
he conversed frequently, and at length with Husserl on these subjects, so that, 
he tells us, "even where the text could not be directly supported by the 
manuscripts, it contains nothing, however, which could not be supported by the 
oral expression of Husser!, and which did not have his consent," Finally, 
Husser!' himself, added some remarks. We must note, particularly, that the 
introduction (EJ, E - pp. 11-68, F - pp. 11-80, G - pp. 1-72) was drafted by 
Landgrebe. who had "freely rendered" the thoughts of Husserl, following his 
writings in the Crisis, and in the Formal and Transcendental Logic, aided by the 
conversations between himself and Husser! and having recourse to the 
manuscripts of 1919-34. H usserl approved the whole, Landgrebe tells us. It is 
none the less true that he did not hurry to publish this text, holding on to it until 
his death. 
2. EJ, E - p. 19, F - pp. 20-21, G - p. II. It would be interesting to give, in this 
footnote, this fragment of a letter of W. Biemel which, while recognizing the 
realist character of the text, tends to diminish its importance: "I ask myself if the 
first pages of your study are entirely just. In fact, in the reading of Experience 
and Judgment, one is struck by its 'realist' charactl~r. It is thus, perhaps, because 
Husser! did not begin with an exposition of the nature of consciousness, but 
through a consideration of the manner in which the existent is given to us. I 
would not say that there is a true opposition. It seems to me that it is, rather, 
"nother aspect which is brought to evidence, and that. nevertheless. the original 
starting point is maintained. Thus, in ldeen II also, it is possible to find passages 
which are in line with the citation given (EJ, E - p. 19, F - pp. 20-21. G - p. II). 
Properly understood. Husserl speaks constantly of the constitution of the 
existent (object), but this constitution is not possible without the subject being 
already affected by an existent, which must. thus. exist previously." 
3. .!, E - p. 19, F- p. 21, G - p. 12. 
4. .!. E - p. 19, F - p. 21, G - p. 12. 
5. EJ, E - p. 20, F - p. 22, G - p. 13. Let us note the first appearance of the word 
"world" in this book. 
6. .!, E - p. 28, F- p. 31, G - p. 22. 
7. .!, E - pp. 29-30, F - pp. 33-34, G- p. 24. 
8. E.!, E - p. 26, F - pp. 29-30, G - p. 20. 
9. J. E - p. 30, F- pp. 33-34, G - p. 24. 
10. 1, E - p. 30, F - pp. 34, G - p. 25. 
II. J, E - p. 31, F - p. 35. G - p. 26. 
12. EJ, E - p. 32, F - p. 36, G - pp. 26-27. 
13. EJ, E - p. 34, F -- p. 38, G - p. 29. 
14. J, E - p. 37, F - p. 43, G - p. 33. 
15. EJ, E - p. 40, F - p. 47, G - p. 37. 
16. EJ. E 
p. 41, F - pp. 47-48, G - p. 38. 
17. .!. E - p. 43, F - p. 49. G - p. 40. 
18. EJ. E - p. 43. F - p. 50, G - p. 41. 
19. EJ, E - p. 45, F - p. 52, G - p. 43. 
194 
20. EJ, E - p. 46, F - pp. 53-54, G - p. 44. Here are place some passages concerning 
accomplishments, which are, following the observations of Biemel, the starting 
point of the labors of the Crisis, the publication of which he prepared. 
21. EJ, E - p. 50, F - p. 58, G - p. 49. 
22. LJ, E - p. 52, F - p. 61, G - p. 49. 
23. EJ, E - p. 56, F - p. 65, G - p. 56. 
24. EJ, E - p. 60, F 
p. 61. 
25. EJ, E - pp. 60-61, F - pp. 70-71, G - p. 62. 
26. EJ, E - p. 62, F - pp. 72-73, G - p. 64. 
27. EJ, E - pp. 64-65, F - p. 75, G - p. 67. 
28. EJ, E - p. 72. F - p. 84, G - p. 74. 
29. Ibid. 
30. EJ, E - p. 80, F - p. 95, G - p. 85. 
31. EJ, E - p. 82, F - p. 96, G - p. 87. 
32. EJ, E - p. 83, F - p. 97, G - p. 88. 
33. EJ, E - p. 81, F - p. 96, G - p. 86. 
34. EJ, E - p. 83, F - pp. 97-98, G - p. 88. 
35. EJ, E - p. 35, F - p. 40, G - p. 31. 
36. EJ, E - p. 83, F - pp. 97-98, G - p. 988. 
37. EJ, E - p. 84, F - p. 98,G - p. 89. 
38. EJ, E - p. 86, F - p. 100, G - p. 91. 
39. 1, E - p. 86, F - p. 101, G - p. 93. Cf. on Dabei. EJ, E- p. 81, F -po 96, G -po 86. 
40. EJ, E - p. 86, F - p. 100, G - p. 91. 
41. EJ, E - p. 86, F - p. 101, G - p. 92. 
42. EJ, E - p. 90, F - p. 105, G - p. 97. 
43. EJ, E - p. 91, F - p. 107, G - p. 98. 
44. EJ, E - p. 95, F - p. 112, G - p. 104. 
45. EJ, E - p. 100, F - p. 118, G - p. 110. 
46. EJ, E - p. 101, F - p. 119, G - p. III. 
47. EJ, E - p. 106, F - p. 124, G - p. 116. 
48. EJ, E - p. 107, F - p. 124, G - p. 117. 
49. EJ, E - p. 107, F - p. 125, G - p. 117. 
50. Ibid. 
51. EJ, E - p. 107, F - pp. 125-26, G - p. 118. 
52. EJ, E - p. 112, F - p. 131, G - p. 124. 
53. EJ, E - p. 109, F - p. 126, G - pp. 118-19. 
54. EJ, E - p. 113, F - p. 132, G - p. 125. 
55. EJ, E - pp. 113-14, F - p. 133, G - p. 126, Merleau-Ponty will bring to light 
similar ideas. 
56. EJ, E - p. 114, F - p. 133, G - p. 126. 
57. EJ, E - p. 115, F - p. 134, G - p. 127. 
58. EJ, E - p. 121, F - p. 142, G - pp. 135-36. 
59. EJ, E - p. 122, F - p. 143, G - pp. 136-37. 
60. EJ, E - p. 122, F - p. 144, G - p. 137. 
61. EJ, E - p. 125, F - p. 147, G - p. 141. 
62. EJ, E - p. 125, F - pp. 146-47, G - pp. 140-41. 
63. EJ, E - p. 126, F - p. 149, G - p. 143. 
64. EJ, E - p. 133, F - p. 157, G - p. 151. 
65. EJ, E - p. 134, F - p. 158, G - p. 152. 
66. EJ, E - p. 134, F - p. 158, G - p. 153. 
67. EJ, E - p. 134, F - p. 158, G - p. 152. 
195 
68. EJ, E - p. 135, F - p. 159, G - p. 153. 
69. EJ, E - p. 135, F - p. 160, G - p. 154. 
70. EJ, E - p. 136, F - p. 161, G - pp. 155-56. 
71. EJ, E - p. 137, F - p. 162, G - p. 156. 
72. EJ, E - p. 137, F - p. 162, G - p. 157. 
73. EJ, E - p. 138, F - p. 163, G - pp. 157-58. 
74. EJ, E - p. 139, F - p. 165, G - p. 159. 
75. EJ, E - p. 140, F - p. 166, F - p. 160. Bere it might well be asked to what extent 
this is Landgrebe's interpretation. 
76. EJ, E - p. 144, F - p. 170, G - p. 165. 
77. EJ. E - pp. 149-50, F - p. 177. G - p. 171. 
78. EJ, E - p. 149, F - p. 178, G - pp. 171-72. 
79. EJ, E - p. 150, F - p. 178, G - p. 172. 
80. Ibid. 
8!. Ibid. 
82. EJ, E - pp. 152-53, F - p. 180, G - p. 174. 
83. EJ, E - p. 152, F - p. 181, G - p. 175. 
84. EJ, E - p. 153, F - p. 182, G - pp. 176-77. 
85. EJ, E - p. 154, F - pp. 183-84, G - p. 178. 
86. EJ, E - p. 155, F - p. 184, G - p. 178. 
87. EJ, E - p. 155, F - pp. 184-85, G - p. 178. 
88. EJ, E - p. 156, F - p. 186, G - p. 180. 
89. EJ, E - p. 158, F - p. 188, G - p. 182. 
90. EJ, E - p. 158, F - p. 188, G - pp. 182-83. 
91. EJ, E - p. 158, F - pp. 188-89, G - p. 183. 
92. EJ, E - p. 159, F - p. 189, G - p. 183. 
93. EJ, E - p. 159, F - p. 189, G - pp. 183-84. 
94. EJ, E - pp. 160-61, F - p. 191, G - pp. 185-86. 
95. El, E - p. 161, F - p. 191, G - p. 186. 
96. E.!. E - pp. 161-62, F - pp. 192-93, G - p. Ill? 
97. EJ, E - p. 163, F - p. 194, G - p. 189. 
98. Ibid. 
99. EJ, E - p. 165, F - p. 197, G - p. 192. 
100. EJ, E - pp. 166-67, F - p. 198, G - p. 194. 
101. EJ, E - p. 169, F - p. 202, G - p. 198. 
102. EJ, E - pp. 173-74, F - p. 207, G - p. 203. 
103. EJ, E - p. 177, F - p. 211, G - p. 207. 
104. EJ, E - p. 177, F - p. 212, G - p. 208. 
105. EJ, E - p. 179, F - p. 214, G - p. 210. 
106. Ibid. 
107. Ibid. 
108. EJ, E - pp. 181-82, F - pp. 219-222, G - pp. 216-18. 
109. EJ, E - p. 185, F - p. 222, G - p. 218. 
110. EJ, E - p. 186, F - p. 223, G - p. 219. 
III. EJ, E - p. 190, F - p. 227, G - p. 224. 
112. EJ, E - p. 189, F - p. 227, G - p. 224. 
113. EJ, E - p. 190, F - p. 227, G - p. 224. 
114. EJ, E - p. 194, F - p. 233, G 
p.230. 
115. This certainly would be the place to take account, also, to an extent, as A. Koyre 
suggested to us, of Busserl's desire in his last years, to make clearly visible that 
his doctrine contains the better part of the sound ideas which were developed by 
196 
Heidegger, while avoiding the sophism, the adventitiousness, and the faults 
which he saw there. The question again comes to mind, particularly in the 
introduction (for example, EJ, E p. 20, 35, 62; F - pp. 22-23, 39-40, 72-73; G 
pp. 13,30,64), how much is Husserl's, and how much is the interpretation of 
Husser! by Landgrebe. 
116. EJ. E 
pp. 19-20. F p. 22. G 
p. 13. 
117. J. E 
p. 34, F 
pp. 39-40. G .. p. 30. 
118. J. E .. p. 62, F . p. 73. G 
p.64. 
119. J, E 
p. 65. F p. 77. G 
p.6[1. 
120. J, E - p. 38. F - pp. 44-45. G - p. 35. 
121. J, E - p. 165. F - p. 196. <.; . p. 191. See translator's note a. 
122. J. E - p. 165. F - p. 196. G - p. 191, Cf. J. E .. p. 156. F p. 186. G p.180. 
123. EJ. E 
p. 159, F 
p. 189. G 
p. 184. 
124. J. E - pp. 23-24. F . p. 26. G 
p. 17. 
125. J, E - p. 39, F - p. 46, G - p. 36. Cf. EJ, E - p. 54. F 
p. 63. G p.54. 
126. J. E - p. 40, F - p. 47. G - p. 37. 
127. EJ. E .. p. 49. F - p. 57. G - p. 48. 
12[1. D. E - p. 55. F 
p. 65, G 
p.56. 
129. EJ, E 
p. 54. F 
p. 63, G 
p. 54. 
130. EJ, E - p. 55, F - p. 64, G 
p.55. 
131. EJ. E- p. 56, F 
p. 65, G 
p.56. 
132. EJ. E . p. 56. F - p. 66. G- p. 57. 
133. For example: EJ. E - pp. 64-65. F- pp. 75-76, G 
p.67. 
134. EJ, E - p. 58, F - pp. 67-68, G - p. 59: E - p. 67, F p. 79. G - p. 71. 
135. EJ, E - p. 59. F - p. 70. G - pp. 61-62. 
136. Cf. also EJ, E - p. 52, F - p. 58. G p. 49. Where the life-world seems to depend 
on subjective accomplishments. 
137. D. E - p. 79, I-
p. 93, G 
p. [13. 
138. EJ, E 
p. 80, F - p. 94, G - p. 85. 
139. J. E p. 85, F 
pp. 99-100, G - p. 90. 
140. EJ. E pp. 88-91. F - pp. 103-106, G 
pp.95-97. 
141. EJ, E - p. 90. F - p. 106. G - p. 97. 
142. Cf. E.!. E 
p. 90. F - p. 106, G - p. 97. 
143. .1. E - p. 92. F - p. 107, G 
p.99. 
144. D. E . pp. 93-94. F - p. 110, G - pp. 101-102. 
145. .1. E - pp. 134-36. F - pp. 157-60. G - pp. 152-54. 
146. .1, E - p. 137. F - p. 163. G - p. 157. 
147. .1. E - p. 138, F - p. 163. G - p. 157. 
148. .1. E - p. 138, F - p. 163. G - p. 158. 
149. .1. E - p. 138, F - p. 164. G 
p. 158. 
150. Here we must take account, following Father van Breda, of the idea of a 
structure of the Lebenswelt, an idea by virtue of which some of OUf criticisms 
lose part of their importance. 
lSI. E.!, E - p. 139, F - p. 165. G - p. 159. 
152. .1. E 
p. 139, F 
p. 165, G - p. 160. 
153. .1. E - pp. 139-40, F p. 166. G - p. 160. 
154. .1, E - pp. 145-46. F .. p. 173. G - p. 168. 
155. EJ, E - pp. 149, 152,156. 173-74; F - pp. 177. 180. 185.207; G - pp. 171.174.179, 
203. 
156. .1. E - pp. 149, 158-59: F- pp. 177. 188: G - pp. 171. 182. 
157. D. E 
p. 150, F - p. 178. G - p. 172. 
197 
158. Ibid. 
159. EJ, E - pp. 150-51,157; F - pp. 179,186; G - pp. 173, 180. 
160. EJ. E - pp. 174-75, F - p. 208, G - p. 204. 
161. EJ, E - p. 175, F - p. 209, G - p. 205. 
162. Ibid. 
163. EJ, E - pp. 158-59, 182; F - pp. 187-88,218; G - pp. 182,214. 
164. EJ, E - pp. 188-189, F - p. 226, G - p. 223. 
A LETTER FROM LUDWIG LANDGREBE TO JEAN WAHL* 
I have read with great pleasure your study of Experienr:e and Judgment. For 
all the recensions that have appeared until now have been simple book reviews. 
Your study is the first attempt at a real discussion of this work, and the first 
attempt to further the thought of the problems which are raised. 
First, concerning the question of knowing to what extent the introduction is 
an authentic exposition of the thoughts of Husserl, and to what extent it 
presents my interpretation of these thoughts, I would say this: 
The introduction, throughout, elaborates elements drawn from Husserl's 
manuscripts, and from the results of my conversations with him. When you 
underline the fundamental realistic tendency of the work, I can say that this 
tendency in no way comes from my interpretation alone. To the contrary, the 
phenomenology of Husserl, on the whole, is run through by this divergence 
between his idealistic program, as may be seen above all, in the Ideas and in 
the Cartesian Meditations, and the results of his detailed analyses, 
particularly those of the last period, which, without his having become clearly 
conscious of this, break with that program. In my book Phanomenologie 
und Metaphysik, I I have already, frequently, indicated something of this, and 
in my new book which will soon appear, Philosophie der Gegenwart,2l apply 
myself to the presentation of these things in a clearer way. But, as at the 
moment of the editing of Experience and Judgment I still held an idealistic 
position, this divergence did not appear clearly to me. This is why the 
developments which have an idealistic tone remain side by side with analyses 
that, in their ultimate results, are irreconcilable with them, without my having 
modified them in any way. But perhaps precisely this absence of 
accommodation between these divergent tendencies gives a more lively image of 
the tensions which run through H usserl's work, than if an attempt had been 
made to polish the whole, which, moreover, could not be done due to the 
material from which I began. In retrospect, it could perhaps be said that 
Husserl's phenomenology had, as an historical function, the triumph of 
*Translated by Laurence E. Winters from "Lettre de M. Landgrebe sur un article de 
M. Jean Wahl concernant Erfahrung und Urteil de Husserl," Revue de metaphysique 
et de morale, 57 (1952), pp. 282-83. 
198 
199 
idealism over itself through the efforts to think to the limit a theory which had, 
as its starting point, the subject. 
In order now not to be too long, I could perhaps limit myself to a 
fundamental problem which your study touches upon from different sides. 
This is the problem of the absolute substrate. You say, on page 13 [17 in the 
French text], that one could see, in the way this concept is determined by 
H usserl, a phenomenological justification for empiricism. In fact, here lies the 
key that will permit a response to all the questions which you raise at the end of 
your study. Husserl's return to a pure, immediate, and ultimate experience, a 
return which, through an abstractive destruction of all the sense givings which 
come from activity, leads to the "sensuous Hyle,''3 again hides, in fact, the 
elements of a sensualism over which Husser! never completely triumphed. This 
explains how the corporeal thing, in its sensible appearance, becomes, for him, 
the final substrate, and how the characters of signification are understood as 
products of intentional accomplishments founded in this sensibility, 
interpreted in a sensualist manner. 
The phenomenologically verifiable core of this conception lies in the fact that 
all experience is founded on self-givenness as sensuous presence in person 
(sinnlichleibhaft), or that which is encountered. But the accomplishment of 
sensibility is not interpreted in a satisfactory way if the hyletic givens (The 
descendents of Humean impressions!) are conceived as their ultimate elements. 
Here, again, is hidden a residue of the "principle of dissociation," criticized by 
the partisans of Gestalt theory. It is only Erwin Straus and Merleau-Ponty4 
who have, it seems to me, triumphed in a definitive way over this sensualism of 
phenomenology. 
It is this difficulty which explains, as well, why the concept of the world is 
ambiguous in H usserl. On the one hand, the world is understood in a Kantian 
way, as the totality of appearances, for, after placing in parentheses the 
presupposition of the objective world in itself, Husserl treats the world as 
meant world (vermeinte), that is to say, a world given for a consciousness, and 
appearing in a consciousness. The world is here, thus, the idea of the "et cetera" 
of experience, in such a way that everything which is given for a consciousness, 
and which can be considered by it, must necessarily be thought as appearing in 
the unity of a consciousness and of its possible experience and, correlatively, 
in the unity of a world. From this point of view, a world is a concept that we 
achieve in thinking the belongingness of all individual being in a 
comprehensive unity. In this sense, a world is an absolute substrate, as 
everything which is encounterable, and is thinkable, can only be thought as a 
mundane existent and, in consequence, as non-independent in relation to that 
comprehensive unity. 
On the other hand, Husserl's analyses demonstrate that the world, as the 
horizon of all that is encountered in every experience of individual beings 
before all conceptual predicative thought, is always already co-experienced. 
200 
As a consequence, there is also an experience of the world for a consciousness 
which is not capable of constructing the concept of the world as totality ofthat 
which may be encountered. But this consciousness of the world as immediate 
presence in itself, is not interpreted in a satisfactory way as long as the 
sensualist concept of sensibility is not abandoned. This is why the concept of 
the world in H usserl is ambiguous, as result of this sensualist concept of 
sensibility. Alongside the concept of a world which comes from the individual 
existent sensibly given, and signifying the idea of its totality. there is another 
concept of a world. as the horizon always co-encountered. which presages 
Heidegger's concept of being-in-the-world. 
In this way. some other difficulties can be clarified. You ask. on page 28 [30 
in French text], if the phenomenon of deception, of the "not thus. but 
otherwise" which for Husserl constitutes the ground of negative judgement, 
does not, in itself, presuppose negation. I would answer that here, Husserl has 
described well the origin ofthe negative judgement. For alljudgement is. from 
the start. judgement on an existent which is in the world. 5 whether it is 
particular or general. and not judgement on the being or non-being of the 
world in its totality. It thus presupposes the belief in the world as a foundation. 
But we are only able to judge a being which is felt to be menaced by 
nothingness. Being found in the world is already, in itself, to be understood 
as being so threatened. But. "to be understood" need not include in itself 
anything which would come from this judgement on the non-being of the 
world. If we conceive negation in this sense, and, in consequence, not in the 
sense of a negative predicative judgement. then it is, in fact. the presupposition 
of the possibility of deception which, in its turn, makes possible the negative 
judgement. But this is a group of thoughts which was not developed by 
H usserl because he lacked a satisfactory concept of sensibility and a 
satisfactory concept of world. 
Concerning the distinction between activity and passivity. I will give you 
only one terminological remark. Husserl comprehended receptivity. that is to 
say, preception itself, as a mode of activity, distinguishing from it a pure 
passivity of simple affection. Thus, for him. the difference between activity (at 
its lower level. receptivity; and. at its higher level. spontaneity) and passivity is 
not relative. but absolute. Certainly this distinction leads to great difficulties. 
but a full article would be necessary to develop them. 
NOTES 
We have here elaborated on the notes in the original text - translator. 
1. Ludwig Landgrebe, Phdnomen%gie und Metaphysik (Hamburg: M. von 
Schroder. 1949. 
2. Ludwig Landgrebe. Philosophie der Gegenwart (Frankfurt: Ullstein, 1957). 
201 
3. Ideas, E - pp. 226-27, F - pp. 287-88, G - pp. 207-08. 
4. Erwin W. Straus, Vom Sinn der Sinne (Berlin: Springer, 1956); Eng. trans., The 
Primary World of the Senses, trans. 1. Needleman (New York: Free Press, 1963). 
For Merleau-Ponty, see especially the Preface and Chapter I of Phenomenology 
of Perception, trans. C. Smith (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1962); 
originally, Phenomenologie de la perception (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1945). 
5. FTL, Chapter 4. 
A NOTE ON SOME EMPIRICIST ASPECTS OF THE 
THOUGHT OF HUSSERL* 
JEAN WAHL 
The phenomenology of Husserl is ordinarily considered to be a theory of 
essences. And it is a fact that his first great work, the Logical Investigations, is 
directed against psychologism. Certainly. it has been observed that the 
Platonic conception of essences, which was affirmed at the beginning of the 
Husserlian meditation, was later replaced by a conception which situated 
essences at the core of life itself; consequently, essence and existence were no 
longer separated as they were at the outset. Similarly, it should be noted that. 
at a certain point, H usserl acknowledges what he calls inexact essences. I It is 
none the less true that the affirmation of ideal objects always remains in his 
thought and we can give as proof of this the following passage from the 
Formal and Transcendental Logic: "The evidence of irreal objects, objects that 
are ideal in the broadest sense. is, in its effect, quite analogous to the evidence 
of ordinary so-called internal and external experience. which alone - on no 
other grounds than prejudice - is commonly thought capable of effecting an 
original Objectification. The identity and. therefore, the objectivity of 
something ideal can be directly 'seen' (and, if we wished to give the word a 
suitable amplified sense. directly experienced) with the same originality as the 
identity of an object of experience in the usual sense .... "2 
Although phenomenology is thus presented to us from the start as a theory 
of essences, what will interest us here especially, and what seems to us the most 
valua ble, are the consequences of the realist and empiricist postulates which 
we are able to discover in it. Putting aside everything that depends upon 
idealist presuppositions. we will consider this system obliquely. in order to 
discover there, in 
preference, the consequences of his few realist 
presuppositions. 
We read in the Formal and Transcendental Logic: " ... we are busied with 
objects .... "3 and not with our consciousness. When we judge. the relation to 
the object is presented in this very judgement. We do not judge the judgement. 
but, always, the objects to which the judgement pertains, the state of affairs. 
All our judgements are directed toward the object. 
*Translated by Laurence E. Winters from "Notes sur quelques aspects empiristes de la 
pen sec de Husserl," Revue de metaphysique el de morale. 57 (1952), pp. 17-45. 
202 
203 
We find the same thought in Experience and Judgment: "The confirmation 
of what exists, how and what it is, is the sense of all cognitive activity."4 
Among all the modes and essential types of consciousness, which can have 
an identical object of which we are conscious, there is one which is originary, 
and to which all the others refer, in so far as they are intentional modifications. 
Now, Husserl tells us that, in a general manner, an intentional modification 
has the property of leading us back to unmodified givens. "But intentional 
modifications have, quite universally, the intrinsic property of pointing back 
to something unmodified. The modified manner of givenness, when, so to 
speak, we interrogate it, tells us itself that it is a modification of an original 
manner of givenness, to which it points .... The fulfilling clarification takes 
place with the transition to a synthesis in which the object of a non-original 
mode of consciousness becomes given either as the same as the object of 
consciousness in the mode 'experience' (the mode 'it itself') or else as the same 
object 'clarified' .... "5 
What we have called realism is naturally completed through an empiricism. 
As Husserl said in his lectures, The Idea of Phenomenology, what he wishes to 
explicate is the idea of the possibility of attaining the object, of viewing the 
object.6 A vision does not permit a demonstration; the blind who wish to see 
will not do so through the force of scientific demonstrations. Let us add, 
however, that the concept of experience must be taken in a very broad sense, 
including not only the self-givenness of an individual existence in a certitude 
of being, but also the modifications of this certitude which may be 
transformed into assumptions, into probabilities, into the mode of "as if," as 
well as into the images of phantasy.7 
What is important here is that intentionality is founded, that is, founded on 
a sphere prior to judgement. 8 
The conceptions which will be set forth here are bound up with the 
Husserlian theory of evidence. We will certainly see that there are different 
sorts of evidence; but all are referred to a fundamental type. "To each region 
and category of would-be objects corresponds phenomenologically not only a 
basic type of sense, or assertions, but also a basic kind of original presenting 
consciousness for such senses, and, pertaining to it, a basic type of originary 
evidence which is essentially motivated by originary givenness of such a 
nature."9 
As Husserl said in the Cartesian Meditations: "Experience in the ordinary 
sense is a particular evidence. All evidence, we may say, is experience in a 
maximally broad, and essentially unitary, sense."10 
This very idea of experience is bound to that of Erfiillung (fulfillment). 
The claim that all the categories which are presented within the sphere of 
judgement are constructed on pre-predicative syntheses, and have their origin 
in them, is a consequence of what we have called the empiricist postulate. And, 
this is true as well for the claim that it is within the pre-predicative sphere that 
204 
may be found the origin of the divisions essential to judgement. It has been 
correctly asserted that "intentional genesis takes place neither on the abstract 
plane of conditions of possibility, nor on the psychological plane of mental 
constructions. "11 And, as the same author says, "the spontaneous course of 
sensuous experience already implies, in the case of modalization, a moment of 
ante-predicative abstraction, where moments (form, color, etc.) are separated 
from the object, which is maintained in its general unity. "12 
It is already in this pre-predicative sphere that the substrate, in a passive 
modification of consciousness, enriches itself through determinations. There 
is, thus, a passive pre-constitution within this ante-predicative activity, and it 
is onto this that fully active constitution will be grafted. "Determination is 
always constituted twice. "13 
This sphere itself must be tied to movements which we passively undertake 
in order for us to take account of the world which is around us. 
Thus we see how our activity of judgement and of perception are 
intelligible, for we are conscious of being close to (aupres de) the object, and, 
that in this way we are able to apprehend it in its bodily presence, so to speak. 
The thought of H usserl assumes, thus, that prior to all judgements that we 
form, there is, in his words, something pre-given. "We need not give any 
transcendental philosophy here. We have only to explicate correctly what 
concerns us: at present, namely, when we are jUdging, the relation to the object 
is effected in our jUdging itself. It must be noted in this connection that the 
object can indeed be given already by experience, prior to the predicative 
judgement. ... "14 
From this idea of the pre-given we are easily able to go to another idea 
which is presented particularly in Experience and Judgment: "We here take 
the 'this' as, so to speak, the zero-point of attribution in this series. (This is its 
logical significance. Its fully concrete significance is naturally more than this. 
To it belongs the 'deictic' character of pointing to, of calling attention to, of 
the demand to take cognizance of)."IS We see thus that Husserl places in the 
foreground what would disappear in the theory of Hegel; although it retains 
nothing of the "this" but its abstract universality, Husserl brings to light that 
fact that it indicates to us some particular point. In this way we understand 
that, for him, the objects of perception distinguish themselves from the objects 
of imagination by their absolute temporal situation. 16 I reach full 
individuation of my objects only if I return to the here and now; it is through 
them that I obtain the determinability necessary for individual intuition. 
What we have said of the here and now should not lead us to believe that 
everything will be presented in our experience in a clearly delimited way. As 
Husser! said, as early as the Ideas, there is surrounding our perceptions, " ... 
an obscure horizon of undetermined reality. "17 It is an idea to which he returns 
in Experience and Judgment particularly; where he demonstrates that all 
experience implies a prior knowledge of the thing which comes before us, and 
205 
of the kind of being to which it appertains, he adds that this pre-knowledge is 
indeterminate, or incompletely determined, without it ever being completely 
empty.18 
It is this experience, at once precise in its designative character, and 
indeterminate through the horizon which surrounds these objects, which will 
evidently be displayed. "Evidence of experience is therefore always 
presupposed .... "19 From this we can comprehend the preeminence of reality 
over all sorts of illusions and irrealities; all irrealities are such only through an 
essential relation to an actual or possible reality.20 This preeminence of reality 
leads us to grant a privilege to perception. "One and the same object can, a 
priori, be intended to in very different modes of consciousness (certain 
essential types: perception, recollection, empty consciousness). Among them 
the 'experiencing mode,' the original mode of consciousness of the object in 
question, has a precedence; to it all others are related as intentional 
modifications.''21 This is what Husserl calls the originary mode, or Urmodus. 
It is what he as well calls doxa. "Here positing (Setzung) is understood as 
doxa, as belief in being .... ''22 This theory of doxa, already sketched in the 
Formal and Transcendental Logic, will be completed in Experience and 
Judgment. " ... this realm of doxa is not a domain of self-evidence of lesser 
rank than that of episteme, ofjudicative knowledge and all its sedimentations 
(Niederschlage) but precisely the domain of ultimate originality to which 
exact cognition returns for its sense, such cognition (it must be recognized) 
having the characteristic of being a mere method and not a way leading to 
knowledge by itself."23 
We are able, thus, to understand the Husserlian idea of the return to the 
"things themselves." It is a question of seeing the object itself in its originary 
character, in its act of originary self-givenness, of grasping it and of having it 
directly. The object is that which is there (da ist). It is thus necessary to 
distinguish the evidence which shows itself in judgement from the evidence of 
the pre-given objects themselves.24 The decisive privilege of external 
perception consists in the fact that in it originary substrates are pregiven. 25 As 
Husser! had already said in the Formal and Transcendental Logic, the 
originary mode of self-givenness is perception. We must, thus, maintain that 
intellectual apprehension is always preceded by affection, which, however, is 
never the fact that an isolated object affects us, 26 and, as we have already seen, 
the domain of doxa, far from having less dignity than that of episteme, is the 
domain of ultimate primordialness; exact cognition, mathematics in 
particular, is not at all a given, but is., rather, a method.n 
Thus we come to the non-predicative sphere. " ... the intrinsically first 
judgement theory is the theory of evident judgements, and the intrinsically 
first thing in the theory of evident judgements (and therefore in judgement 
theory as a whole) is the genetical tracing of predicative evidences back to the 
non-predicative evidence called experience. "28 
206 
The idea of evidence must be completed by that of intentionality. "The 
concept of any intentionality whatever - any life-process of consciousness of 
something or other - and the concept of evidence, the intentionality that is the 
giving of something itself. are essentially correlative. "19 
Further, it may be said. as Husser! does in the Formal and Transcendental 
Logic. concerning an intentionality of experience itself: " ... certainty and 
modalities of certainty. suppositive intention and fulfillment. identical 
existent and identical sense. evident having of something itself. trueness of 
being (being 'actual') and truth as correctness of sense - that none of these is a 
peculiarity exclusively within the predicational sphere. that. on the contrary. 
they all belong already to the intentionality of experience. "10 It is thus secn 
that being and sense cannot be separated. 
Intentionality govcrns and supports all our thought. whether we are 
conscious of it or not: "The living intentionality carries me along. it 
predelineates; it determines me practically in my whole procedure. including 
the procedure of my natural thinking, whether this yields being or illusion. 
The living intentionality does all that. even though, as actually functioning. it 
may be non-thematic. undisclosed. and thus beyond my ken. "31 
This allows us to move on to the H usserlian idea of the non-reflective. as 
expressed. for example. in thc Ideas: "The experience as really lived at the 
moment, as it first enters into the focus of reflexion, presents itself as really 
lived, as being 'now'; but not only that. it presents itself as just havinf{ been, 
and so far as it was unnoticed as precisely such as not having been reflectcd 
on."32 Thus, we reflect on the unreflected. We discover here the idea of the 
pregiven, as we have already seen,1' and we also comprehend the bond 
between this affirmation of the unreflected. and the realism of Husser!: 
" ... lived-experiences do not only exist when we are turned toward them and grasp 
them in immanent experience; we believe that they actually exist, that they 
were really lived by us .... "34 Thus, as Husser! says in the Formal and 
Transcendental Logic: "As for the cores. they refer us to the fact that judicial 
action continually presupposes things given beforehand."35 
This pre-given is. moreover. a whole. appearing a5 a field. "And it is not mere 
particular objects. isolated by themselves, which are thus pre given but always 
a field of pregivenness, from which a particular stands out. and. so to speak. 
'excites us' to perception and to perceptive contemplation. "36 Immediate 
cognition knows no exactly determined time. space. or objective causality.37 
And it is wrong to interpret the given itself with the aid of mathematics. which 
is only a method of idealization acting on the given. 
There is thus a horizon of familiarity within which our experience takes 
place. 38 The world. the world of our experience is the universal ground of all 
our particular experiences, an immediate foundation of these experiences and 
prior to all experiences and to all logical accomplishments. It is, thus. a 
question of returning to this world of experience. to this life-world in which we 
207 
now and always live, and which is the foundation of all cognitive action and of 
all scientific determination.39 Moreover, the idea of experience itself must be 
expanded, for, "this commonplace, familiar, and concrete sense of the word 
'experience' points much more to a mode of behavior which is practically 
active and evaluative than specifically to one that is cognitive and 
judicative. "40 
The familiarity of which we are speaking is what Husser! calls a typical 
familiarity; by which he means that there are modes or forms of objects a 
priori, into which we come to classify each object. 41 
The idea of a priority and, in a sense, of a preeminence of passivity is 
introduced little by little into Husser!'s meditations: "The access to problems 
of the universal lawfulness of phenomenological genesis appeared rather late, 
and disclosed at bottom a passive genesis, instrumental in the foundation of 
new intentionalities and apperceptions, yet without any active participation of 
the 'I.' In this connection a phenomenology of association was developed. Its 
conception and origin received a fundamentally new form through the at first 
surprising realization that 'association' is a monstrous name for lawfulness, 
that is, for an inborn a priori, without which the ego as such is unthinkable. "42 
This idea of a passive genesis is particularly developed in Experience and 
Judgment: ". . . all passive consciousness is already 'constitutive of 
objects' .... "43 "In receptivity, although the ego is indeed actively turned 
toward what affects it, it does not make its knowledge, and the individual steps 
of cognition as the means to its achievement, an object of will. "44 Moreover, 
the separation of activity and passivity is not fixed; it is not a question of terms 
which could be defined once and for all, but only of means of description and 
distinction, the sense of which must be taken from the concrete situation in 
each particular case. 
A problem arises here. Must we not say that the ideas of passivity and ofthe 
unconscious are only limit concepts? This is a question which Husserl poses in 
the Formal and Transcendental Logic,45 and to which Tran-Duc-Thao calls 
attention.46 
The idea of evidence which plays such a great role in phenomenological 
thought, must not be taken in the strict classical sense of the word. In the 
lectures, The Idea of Phenomenology, Husser! already had written: "In 
contemporary philosophy, insofar as it claims to be a serious science, it has 
become almost a commonplace that there can be only one method for 
achieving cognition in all the sciences as well as in philosophy. This conviction 
accords wholly with the great philosophical traditions of the seventeenth 
century, which also thought that philosophy's salvation lay wholly in its 
taking as a model of method the exact sciences, and, above all, mathematics 
and mathematical natural science. "47 Similarly, in the Formal and 
Transcendental Logic, Husser! wrote: "Thus it happens that evidence is 
usually conceived as an absolute apodicticity, an absolute security against 
208 
deceptions .... The usual theorist sees in evidence an absolute criterion of 
truth .... "48 Now, we must take into account that the structure of evidence is 
not, in all cases, the same. " ... imperfect experience is still experience, still a 
consciousness that is a having of something itself (Bewusstsein der 
Selbsthabe), can experience adjust itself to experience and correct itself by 
experience. For this same reason, moreover, it is wrong for a criticism of 
sensuous experience, which naturally brings out its essential imperfection 
(that is: its being at the mercy of further experience !), to end with rejecting it-
whereupon the critic in his extremity appeals to hypotheses and indirect 
arguments, with which he attempts to seize the phantom of some (absurdly) 
transcendent 'in-itself.' All Transcendental-realist theories, with their 
arguments leading from the 'immanent' sphere of purely 'internal' experience 
to an extra-psychic transcendency, are attributable to a blindness to the proper 
character of 'external' experience as a performance that gives us something 
itself and would otherwise be unable to provide a basis for natural-scientific 
theories."49 And again, similarly: "The trader in the market has his market-
truth. In the relationship in which it stands, is his truth not a good one, and the 
best that a trader could use? Is it a pseudo-truth, merely because the scientist, 
involved in a different relativity and jUdging with other aims and ideas, looks 
for other truths .. with which a great many more things can be done, but not 
the one thing that has to be done in a marketT'so Husser! continues: "It is high 
time that people got over being dazzled, particularly in philosophy and logic, 
by the ideal and regulative ideas and methods of the 'exact' sciences- as 
though the in-itself of such sciences were actually an absolute norm .... 
Actually, they do not see the woods for the trees. Because of a splendid 
cognitive performance, though with only a very restricted teleological sense, 
they overlook the infinitudes of life and its cognition, the infinities of relative 
and, only in its relativity, rational being, with its relative truths. But to rush 
ahead and philosophize from on high about such matters is fundamentally 
wrong; it creates a wrong skeptical relativism and a no less wrong logical-
absolutism, mutual bugbears that knock each other down and come to life 
again like figures in a Punch and Judy show."51 Husserl reminds us that what 
he calls the essential style of experience indicates the "Being-sense" of the 
world, of all essentially relative realities which it would be absurd to try to 
rectify through an appeal to divine veracity. We can conclude this set of 
suggestions and indications by an assertion from the Ideas which already 
cited: "To each region and category of would-be objects corresponds 
phenomenologically not only a basic type of sense or assertions, but also a 
basic kind of original presenting consciousness for such senses, and, 
pertaining to it, a basic type of originary evidence which is essentially 
motivated by originary givenness of such a nature."52 
It is appropriate to enlarge the idea of evidence, not only, as we have said, 
integrating it with sensuous and empirical experience, but also, integrating it 
209 
with the entire affective domain. "Cogito can signify 'I perceive," I remember,' 
or 'I expect' - modes of consciousness that indeed belong to the doxic sphere, 
though not in the sphere of predicativeJy determining thinking. But it can also 
signify: 1 exercise 'valuing' emotional activities, in liking or disliking, in 
hoping or fearing, or volitional activities, or the like. "53 It is through this 
interpretation, which is quite close to the Cartesian cogito, and which may be 
linked to a reflection on Hume's theory of belief,54 that we are able to 
understand this broadening of evidence and its application to the affective 
domain. "But always preliminary to this grasping is affection, which is not the 
affecting of an isolated, particular object. "55 The pre-given of which we have 
spoken is, thus, an affective pre-given, outside of cognitive performances. 
If we study the possible consequences of the theories which we have 
considered, on the idea of truth, we will see that three quite different 
conceptions are developed from them: "Everything that exists is 'in itself,' in a 
maximally broad sense, and stands in contrast to the accidental being 'for me' 
of the particular acts; likewise every truth is, in its broadest sense, a 'truth in 
itself.' "56 It is possible to recognise here the theories of Bolzano and, at the 
same time, one of the origins of the distinction between noesis and noema. 
Nevertheless, we must add that for external perception, in opposition to 
internal perception, an essential characteristic is its partial nature, that is that 
to every perception there belongs a complex horizon of un-fulfilled 
anticipations which demand to be fulfilled, and thus contain simple 
significations oriented toward potential corresponding evidences. "This 
imperfect evidence becomes more nearly perfect in the actualizing synthetic 
transitions from evidence to evidence, but necessarily in such a manner that no 
imaginable synthesis of this kind is completed as an adequate evidence: any 
such synthesis must always involve unfulfilled expectant, and accompanying 
meanings. "57 "The inability to be perceived immanently, and therefore, 
generally to find a place in the system of experience belongs in essence and 'in 
principle' altogether to the thing as such .... Thus the thing itself, simpliciter, 
we call transcendent. "58 Husserl takes up this idea again in Experience and 
Judgment: "Where, in virtue of their essence, the underlying substrates 
themselves can never come to perfectly adequate givenness ... and perfectly 
adequate given ness is an idea located in infinity .... "59 There is a perpetual 
anticipation of new givens. The completely determinate subject, "the identical 
self fully determinate in itself" is an idea of reason.60 
We must certainly, here as well, take into account the fact that there is an 
evidence, a truth; but the judgement of perception cannot ever contain the 
state of affairs itself which it designates; and we must satisfy ourselves with 
this fundam(:ntal inadequacy, for it is the nature of our perception.61 
A second conception of truth, implicit and even sometimes explicit in the 
works of Husserl, has been thoroughly elucidated by Thao in his penetrating 
book mentioned above: "Dogmatism necessarily ends in skepticism, both are 
2\0 
founded on the definition of truth as absolute." It was this point which we 
were making by citing the passage of H usserl which shows how each of these 
doctrines calls up the other, and negates it. "Now, this is precisely the intrinsic 
absurdity of this common postulate that phenomenology denounces .... 
Truth, as defined through evidence, may not, by that very fact, be posited in the 
absolute of an in-itself, for it belongs precisely to the sense of all evidence to be 
able to be mistaken .... Thus, truth is defined only through its becoming, that 
is to say, not as an intelligible movement of ideas, but as effectively lived 
temporality. Constituting consciousness is a living present which constantly 
flows, and each moment, in its turn, acquires the privilege of actuality. "62 
But we find a third conception of truth. particularly in the Formal and 
Transcendental Logic, a conception which allows us to comprehend how the 
theory of truth, which will later be developed by Heidegger. is linked to an 
aspect of the theory of Husser!. "We must start by going back from the 
judgement to the judgement-substrates, from truths to their objects-a bout-
which."63 We must distinguish, on the one hand, truth as correctness of 
judgement, which we will lead back to self-givenness (experience in the broad 
and the narrow senses), and to adequation; and on the other, veritable being.M 
As Thao says, in developing a similar idea, "the actual order does not go from 
purely verbal effectuations of predicative forms to the consideration of their 
possible truth. In fact, we start from effective judgements where the world is 
constituted in intelligible determinations, and logic is originarily defined as a 
doctrine of being. "65 "The problem of the passage from the evidence of 
distinctness to the evidence of clarity - in vulgar terms: the problem of the 
passage from formal signification to the real signification oflogic - is thus not 
raised, distinctness is only a moment, artificially detached from clarity. "66 
We can now move to a group of concepts which will lead us toward the idea 
of world. 
All perception is surrounded by an environment: "The specifically 
apprehended thing has its environment of things, which perceptually appear 
with it, but which lacks a separate positing of existence .... It is to a certain 
extent a unity of potential situations.''67 We find an analogous idea in the 
Formal and Transcendental Logic, which is called there "horizon 
intentionality"; "without which the surrounding world of daily living would 
not be an experienced world, is always prior to its explication by someone who 
reflects. And it is the factor that essentially determines the sense of occasional 
judgements - always, and far beyond what at any time is, or can be. said 
expressly and determinately in the words themselves."68 And we again 
discover the same idea in Experience and Judgment, there called a "field of 
experience," which is the environment of other presences which are always co-
given as a plurality of substrates which co-affect the same subject. It is a 
multiple unity of affection.69 
The importance of the idea of world in phenomenology is well known. A 
211 
world, as Husserl tells us in the Formal and Transcendental Logic, does not 
come as if from the outside through a door into my ego, as Aristotle expressed 
it. "The relation of my consciousness to a world is not a matter of fact imposed 
on me either by a god, who adventitiously decides it thus, or by a world 
existing beforehand accidentally, and a causal regularity belonging thereto. ''70 
There is, then, a primordial experience of the world, an experience of a 
universal style in which I move.?1 Here again we are able to complete the 
indications of the Formal and Transcendental Logic with those of Experience 
and Judgment: "It is this universal ground of belief in a world, which all 
praxis presupposes, not only the praxis of life but also the theoretical praxis of 
cognition. The being of the world in totality is that which is not first the result 
of an activity of judgement but which forms the presupposition of all 
judgement. Consciousness of the world is consciousness in the mode of 
certainty of belief. ... "72 And this world, H usserl tells us, must not be confused 
with the totality of nature; it is something prior: it is absolute substrate; that is 
to say that in it is everything and that it is in nothing external to it. 73 It is what 
H usserl calls the Lebenswelt, that is, the world in which we always and already 
live, and which furnishes the ground for all achievements of cognition and of 
all scientific determination.?4 It is what we have already called the passive pre-
given. 75 
Following Husserl, all our experience takes place in space and time. This 
holds, above all, for the world of purely sensuous experience, to which he calls 
our attention in Experience and Judgment; but it also holds, mediately, for 
human subjects or animals, for the products of culture, for the things of which 
we make use, for works of art, etc. "Everything mundane participates in 
nature. The naturalization of spirit is not an invention of philosophers - it is a 
fundamental error if falsely interpreted and misused, but only under these 
conditions. In fact, it has its ground and its justification in this, that mediately 
or immediately all that is worldly has its place in the spatio-temporal sphere. 
Everything is here or there, and its place is determinable, as are places in 
general, in the same way that everything spatio-temporal is determinable, i.e., 
temporally determinable by means of physical instruments .... In this way, 
everything non-sensible partakes of the sensible; it is an existent from the 
world, existing in the one spatio-temporal horizon. ''76 But we must again 
repeat that physical time is only an idealization of something more 
fundamental, of this immediate experience which does not know exact space, 
objective time, or objective causality.77 
Prior to the scientific world and even prior to the world of common sense, 
there exists something which we could call the "pre-world,''7S that is, a world 
which is not articulated through forms and categories. There is something 
which is, " ... my bodily organism, which is, according to its sense, spatial and 
a member of an environment made up of spatial bodies, a nature (within 
which I encounter the bodily organism of someone else) - it points back, I 
212 
say, to the fact that none of these can as yet have objective world significance. 
My intrinsically first psycho-physical ego (we are referring here to 
constitutional strata, not temporal genesis), relative to whom the intrinsically 
first someone-else must be constituted, is, we sec, a member of an intrinsically 
first nature, which is not yet objective nature, a nature the spatio-temporality 
of which is not yet objective spatio-temporality .... "79 Certainly this is the 
same conception which may be found in the Cartesian Meditations, which is 
called there "world" or "primordial transcendence," or, as Husser! says, 
"primordial." The world is exterior to me, but not external in the spatio-
natural sense;KO it is within this world, whose externality is prior to all 
conceptual externality, that other egos live and move. 81 
It is to this prior world, prior not to experience, but in experience, that the 
analyses of Experience and Judgment apply, and, in particular, the assertion 
that we may find there the presence in experience of relations. "We carefully 
consider the pen-holder, for example. Our attention wanders from it, which, 
(as our theme) is still retained in grasp, to the table top. We also draw the 
latter within our sphere of observation, not as a principal theme but only as a 
theme in relation to the pen-holder. Without our having once again to turn 
expressly to the pen-holder in a new original apprehension, it is for us, as long 
as it is retained in grasp, 'the pen-holder lying on the table.' In the same way, 
when we bring into consideration the pencil, which lies beside the pen-holder, 
there follows an apprehension of the 'lying next to' but still without any 
predicative formation.''82 We find here something analogous to the radical 
empiricism of James, in so far as it includes relations within experience. 
If now, after what we have said about the world, we approach the question 
of space and time, while not fully respecting the order of Husserl's exposition, 
we are able, from the outset, to stress the objectivity of space and time. "The 
unity of the perception of a plurality of individuals is thus a unity on the basis 
of a connecting temporal form. It is the unity which is at the bottom of the 
relation already alluded to, namely, that of 'lying beside one another,' hence 
of relations of spatial position. Individual objects of perception have their 
reciprocal spatial positions on the basis of their belonging-together in a single 
time.''83 In a most precise way, the time by which they are united is not the 
subjective time of lived experiences of perception, but the objective time 
which belongs to their sense as objects. It is thus not simply a matter of fact 
that lived experiences of perception are immanently contemporaneous, that 
is, inclusive in a general way, of a manner to form a unique perception of the 
mUltiplicity, but it also concerns the fact that the objectivities which are 
intended in themselves as real, are meant as enduring contemporaneously, 
objectively. The unity of intuition which we find here is, thus, not only united 
on the foundation of the intuitive intending of the multiplicity in the living 
present, but is also the unity of the objective whole. This will become clearer 
when contrasted to other cases where there also is intuitive unity, but where 
213 
the things intuitively unified are intended objectively as existent in different 
times, as, for example, the objects of fantasy, in so far as they do not exist in 
an objective time. This is why we will be forced to go beyond the domain of the 
things which are always particular, a domain in which, so far, our 
investigations have been confined. Up until now, perception has been at issue, 
that is to say, positional consciousness which intends its object as existent;and 
these objects were only thought as objects for me; as objects ofa world which 
was only for me. But the reference to an objective world which is inevitable 
here, and in the following, constrains us to go beyond the domain of the 
"being-only for me," so that we may understand the oppositions between 
perception and memory. on the one hand, and the lived-experiences of 
imagination on the other, as differences which are conditioned by this 
opposition. "Objective time, objective being, and all the determinations of 
existents as objective, certainly designate a being not only for me but also 
for others. ''84 We may say, from another point of view, that there is a temporal 
structure of the passive field, which is prior to all acts, and which constitutes 
the passive unity of the pre-given of the mUltiple perceived things.85 
It is starting from the things given in experience that the orders of space and 
time are constituted, the situations within space and time. "The individuality 
of this becoming founds the connecting unity and order (relations). Matters 
are similar with the order of spatial position, which is founded in the temporal 
order of individual objects. Space is the order of the individual simultaneity of 
sensuously given (material) things. The individualizing moments (and in the 
temporal form of at-the-same-time, the here and there individualizes) can 
found continuity (Zusammenhang); and spatial position, spatial extension, 
founds spatial continuity. ''86 In this way, space is constituted as a form of 
order. 
From this space, the human mind will constitute the space of common 
sense, and the space of science, through a process of idealization and 
nominalization. It is the result of this process of idealization that we finally 
take for reality. " ... to interpret the world of our experience always according 
to the sense of this garb of ideas thrown over it, as if it were thus 'in itself.' ''87 
Moreover, nominalization transforms collections, numbers, and relations, 
the operations and the results of operations which consciousness reaches, into 
independent objects.88 
But there will always remain an element of indeterminacy in a space thus 
constituted. "I have complete individualization only when 1 return to my hic 
et nunc. Otherwise, 1 have a non-intuitivity; an intuitive representation, 
certainly, but, with regard to that which individualizes the situation, it is an 
indeterminateness; 1 have a relative individualization of bodies compared 
with other bodies in a relative spatial order, but the latter itself is, however, 
not yet fully determined as regards its position. ''89 It is only when 1 appeal to 
the here and now that I obtain, in spite of the absence of logical 
214 
determination, the desired determinability for individual intuition as such. 
On the other hand, we know that within the domain of primordial 
experience, there is no exact space or objective time.9o Thus determination 
appears in the sphere intermediate between primordial experience and the 
completely formalized experience of science. 
It is none the less true that, for Husserl, everything mundane is here or there, 
and that the place is determinable, as we have already underlined.9l It seems 
legitimate to conclude from this that when he formulates this claim, Husserl 
places himself at the point of view of this intermediate experience, situated 
between the two extreme experiences. 
It is now appropriate to study more closely the Husserlian theory of time. 
For the moment, we will not take into account the lectures on the 
Phenomenology of Internal Time Consciousness, as Husserl had the 
intention to change them profoundly. From the start, we will emphasize 
duration (duree), properly so called. "The evidence of the absolutely original 
present of a sounding tone in the momentary now-point (naturally we are not 
referring to a mathematical point) functions, of essential necessity, in 
connection with an evidence of the 'just gone' and an evidence of the originally 
'coming.' "92 This example is taken up again in Experience and Judgment: "If 
we come now to the active (receptive) apprehension of the sound which rings 
out, then the apprehension itself endures continuously .... we are not turned 
toward the momentary and yet continuously changing present (the phase 
sounding now) but through and beyond this present, in its change, toward the 
sound as a unity by which its essence presents itself in this change, in this flux 
of appearances. When we examine this more closely, we see that the activity of 
apprehension is directed toward the sound which is presently vivid in such a 
way that it is apprehended as a sound which continuously endures as present, 
so that the primary ray of apprehension of the ego traverses the central 
moment of the original now (toward the moment of the sound appearing in 
this form); and that is to say that it goes toward the now in its continuous 
transitional flux, i.e., from a now to an ever new now, and therewith to an ever 
new moment appearing in the flux of moments emerging for the first time. A 
now never remains as such; each one becomes one just past and then becomes 
the past of the next. ... ''93 There is thus a continuity of past experiences; and 
all this constitutes the flowing unity of activity. One may say the same of the 
wave of the horizons of the future. We thus see that the activity of 
apprehending the tone which concretely endures, has a complicated structure 
which is erected on the foundation of the lawfulness ofthe constitution of the 
living duration which flows, prior to all activity, in its own passivity.94 
As Thao says: "The movement of the living present consists in constantly 
going beyond, while maintaining in itself its past as a moment overcome, 
conserved, gone beyond; ... it is this movement ... which constitutes the tone 
215 
in its different modes; the past as that which is gone beyond, the present as the 
going beyond itself, in so far as it is actually accomplished, the future as that 
which is coming to consciousness as it is going beyond toward it. In retention, 
the past is maintained in itself; in protention, the future announces itself; the 
transcending of the past into the future constitutes the actuality of the present, 
as passage from the in-itself to the for-itself. ''95 
We are led, thus, to say something about the theory of protention and 
retention. It is in Zeitbewusstseins that the first study of it is found. Even 
beneath memory properly so called, there may be found retention, or 
primary remembrance, which is close to immediate intuition, and, as a 
fundamental phenomenon, gives birth to memory, and is the foundation of it. It 
is, as Ricoeur says, the lived-through (vicu), still retained in the present." The 
consequence of the affirmation of retention is that, as Husser! says in the 
Ideas, evidence applies as well to the experiences that have just been 
immediately lived through as to those which are presently lived. " ... it would 
be absurd to doubt whether that which we discover as 'still' consciously there 
when we give a glance backwards (the immediately retained) ever existed ... 
''96 Between Zeitbewusstseisns and the Ideas are situated the lectures on the 
Idea of Phenomenology, in which we find the same assertion. There Husser! 
considers as givens not only the present cogitatio, but also that which is given 
later, in a "fresh recollection.''97 We find the same idea much later in the 
Formal and Transcendental Logic: "An intentionally modified and much 
more complicated mode of the giving of something itself is the memory that 
does not emerge emptily but, on the contrary, actualizes 'it itself' again: clear 
recollection. ''98 Certainly, it seems that there is something different here than 
primary retention, but it is, in all cases, founded on it. 
This entire theory of retentions, which must, moreover be completed by the 
theory of retentions of retentions, and by the theory of protentions, must not 
cause us to forget that, according to Husserl, the entire theory of time is 
essentially founded in the present. "Every experience is in itself. .. a constant 
flow of retentions and protentions mediated by a primordial phase which is 
itself in flux, in which the living now of the experience comes to consciousness 
contrasting with its 'before' and 'after.' ''99 And it may even be noted that the 
theories of retention and protention have, as a goal, the enrichment of the 
characteristic which we attribute to the living present. As Thao says, " ... when 
consciousness which is in time, looses itself constantly, the modes of 
temporalization of the living present represent a maintaining, and a perpetual 
conquest of the self: the past is there retained as that which is again (retention), 
and the future comes to pass as that which is already (protention). In this 
continual movement, where each present moment passes immediately into 
retention, and sinks more and more into the past, but into a past which is 
again, while the future, always and already possessed in protention, is 
216 
actualized in a living-present, the self remains self-identical through constant 
self-renewal. It is, precisely, the same, only as always other, in this absolute 
surge of an eternal present. "100 
This present is what Husser! calls the "streaming present" (stromende 
Gegenwart).IOI 
But in spite of the flowing character of time, we must attend to an aspect 
which must complete it. This is what, in Experience and Judgment, Husser! 
called the principle of the unity of recollection. There is an unity of duration 
which characterizes each of our remembrances; there is an unity of memory, as 
there is of perception; and these are the "horizon intentions" which place it in 
relation to objectivity.lo2 
Finally, it is equally necessary to complete the Husserlian theory of time 
through what Husser! calls "omni-temporality" (Allzeitlichkeit). 
Certain, again as Thao says: " .. .'eternal' consciousness could not be 
known apart from consciousness which is lost in time. "103 " ... super-
temporality turns out to be omnitemporality, as a correlate of free 
producibility and reproducibility at all times."lo4 "The timelessness of the 
objectivities of the understanding, their being 'everywhere and nowhere,' 
proves, therefore, to be a privileged form of temporality, a form which 
distinguishes these objectivities fundamentally and essentially from individual 
objectivities. That is, a supertemporal unity pervades the temporal 
multiplicity within which it is situated: this supertemporality implies 
omnitemporality. The same unity is present in each multiplicity of this kind, 
and it is such that it is present in time essentially. If I now make a judgement. 
then the what of the judgement, the judicative proposition, is present to 
consciousness in the mode of now; and yet it is not at a point in time and is not 
represented in any such point by an individual moment, an individual 
singularization. . . . such an irreality has the temporal being of 
supertemporality, of omnitemporality, which, nevertheless, is a mode of 
tern porality. "I 05 
After having been concerned with the ideas ofwor!d, and then, of space and 
time, we can now pass to the domain of reflection, and examine the ideas of 
negation and of possibility. Husser! wrote in the Ideas: "In this connection we 
must first of all be clear on this point, that every variety of'reflexion' has the 
character of a modification of consciousness . ... we speak of modifications 
here just in so far as every reflexion has its essential origin in changes of 
standpoint, whereby a given experience or unreflective experience-datum 
undergoes a certain transformation .... "106 There is a certain tension, within 
phenomenological doctrine, between the claim that within the domain of 
consciousness there are not the diverse perspectives which are found in the 
domain of external things, and that there is an identity of the intuited and the 
intuiting, and the affirmation, which we have just seen, of a modification of 
consciousness through reflection. 
217 
"It thus appears that negation is not first the business of the act of 
prcdicative judgement but that in its original form it already appears in the 
prepredicative sphere of receptive experiences. "107 In the processes of 
disappointment, of deception, we will find the primary form of negation. A 
second idea which Husserl proposes to us concerning negation, is that it 
presupposes the normal originary objective constitution, that is, what we call 
normal perception. "It must be present in order to be able to be modified in its 
originality. Negation is a modification of consciousness .... It is always a 
partial cancellation on the basis of a certitude of belief which is thereby 
maintained, ultimately, on the basis of the universal belief in the world. "108 
We find in the Paris Lectures, a number of clues to the idea of possibility. 
"Potentiality in existence is just as important as actuality, and potentiality is 
not empty possibility. Every cogito - for instance, an external perception, a 
recollection, etc. - carries in itself a potentiality immanent to it and capable of 
being disclosed. It is a potentiality for possible experiences referring to the 
same object, experiences which the ego ean actualize, horizons, and in various 
senses. Perception occurs and sketches a horizon of expectations, the future as 
it might be perceived that is to say, it points to coming series of perceptions. 
Each series, in turn, carries potentialitiies with it, such as the fact that I can 
look in one direction rather than in another, and can redirect the run of my 
perceptions. Each recollection leads me to a long chain of possible 
recollections ending in the now; and at each point of immanent time it refers 
me to other present events that might be disclosed; and so on. "109 Thus, as he 
will say later in the Cartesian Meditations, " ... every actuality involves its 
potentialities which are not empty possibilities, but rather possibilities 
intentionally predelineated in respect of content - namely, in the actual subject 
process itself - and, in addition, having the character of possibilities 
actualizable by the ego. "110 
In Experience and Judgment, Husserl goes back further toward the 
psychological origin of the phenomenon, back toward the struggle between 
the tendencies of belief. Thus, possibility appears as a phenomenon which 
already appears, as does negation, within the pre-predicative sphere, and is 
"most at home" in this sphere. While deception is the origin of negation, 
hesitation is the origin of possibility. 
As we have seen, one of the most important points here is the distinction 
between empty and fulfilled possibility; and, as with negation, we may 
discover rapprochements between the H usserlian and the Bergsonian theories 
of possibility. 
To go further into the study oftheforms and activities of our mind, we must 
take into account the fact that propositions involve not only syntactic forms, 
forms of subject and predicate but also a syntactic matter: the core 
formations, for example, bodies. 111 Therefore, we come, naturally, to the 
study of the idea of object, and of thing. We may begin here with a passage 
218 
from the lectures, The Idea of Phenomenology. It is a question, Husser! tells 
us, of" ... distinctly connected and as it were congruent unities, and unities of 
cognition, which, as unities of cognition have also their unitary objective 
correlates."112 We have to take account of a reservation which Husserl 
expresses in Experience and Judgment, in a footnote: "This talk about 
objects is, to be sure, admissible here only with reservations. For in the natural 
process of external perception we do not have sense data objectively, but 
through them Wl: are directed toward the 'perspectively shaded' perceived 
things appearing in them. They first become objects in the proper sense 
(thematic objects) in reflection by means of abstractive separations. "IIJ In spite 
of the reservations that this note displays, the importance of this theory of 
objects in phenomenology is well known. 
In all these reflections on the ideas of object there are implicated certain 
ideas concerning substance. The distinction between substance and its 
determinations is, from the start, for Husser!, relative. "Everything that 
affects and is objective can just as well play the role of object-substrate as that 
of object-determination or explicate."114 We are always able to call what 
comes under the attentive gaze, a substrate, and, in this way, conceive of the 
idea of substrate in general. 
From the general theory of objects, we are able to move naturally to the 
theory of the thing. '''Perception' in the normal sense of the word does not 
only indicate generally that this or that thing appears to the ego in embodied 
presence, but that the ego is aware of the appearing thing, grasps it as really 
being there, and posits it. "II 5 In the Formal and Transcendental Logic, 
Husser! tells us how, "in repeated experience - before any repetition, in the 
continuous modification of the momentary perception in retention and 
protention, then in possible recollections, repeatable at will ~there comes 
about, with their synthesis, the consciousness of the same, moreover as an 
'experience' of this self-sameness. The possibility of such original 
identification belongs, as essential correlate, to the sense of every object of 
experience ... a sense determined to the effect that experience is an evident 
seizing upon and having of either an immanent or a real individual datum 
itself. "116 "Essentially in the continuous and discrete syntheses of manifold 
experiences, the experiential object, as such, is built up 'visibly': in the varying 
show of ever new sides, ever new moments belonging to its own essence. And 
from this constitutive (aufbauenden) life, which predelineates its own possible 
harmonious flow, the sides and moments and the object itself (as showing 
itself only thus, variously) draw their respective senses, each as the identical 
that belongs to possible and - after their actualization - repeatable shapings of 
something itself (Selbstbildungen). "117 Similar ideas are brought forth in the 
Paris Lectures: "It follows that the stream of consciousness is permeated by the 
fact that consciousness relates itself to objects (Gegenstlindlichkeit). This 
relation is an essential characteristic of every act of consciousness. It is the 
219 
ability to pass over ~ through synthesis - from perennially new and greatly 
disparate forms of consciousness to an awareness of their unity. "118 
And again we can find the same elements of a theory of the thing in 
Experience and Judgment. 119 The successive appearances are apprehended 
as appearances of the same object, toward which perception directs itself, in a 
way to apprehend a unity of identity, something which was and will be, as it 
is.leO 
Starting from this, we would be constrained to move to the indications 
which Husserl gives about the particular thing which is my body. But it is to 
Volume II of Ideen that we should refer for such a study, as well as for a study 
of the soul, as it is what Husser! calls a founded object, that is, an existent 
which can only be perceived on the foundation of another existent, especially 
in the case of the soul of another. 
A certain number of Husserl's meditations are devoted to the idea of 
nature. "From the phenomenon world, from the world appearing with an 
objective sense, a substratum becomes separated, as the 'nature' included in 
my ownness. a nature that must always be carefully distinguished from nature 
pure and simple _. that is to say: from the nature that becomes the theme of the 
natural scientist. This nature, to be sure, is likewise the result of abstraction, 
namely abstraction from everything psychic and from those predicates of the 
objective world that have arisen from persons. "121 In nature, in the full sense, 
by body will be found, whereas in simple nature, there will figure body in 
general, body as extended. 
Within nature in the full sense, we find the presence of others. Here H usserl 
presents a problem with which he deals in the fifth Cartesian Meditation and 
in Ideen II. Let us, for the moment, hold on only to the formulation of the 
problem. "The character of the existent 'other' has its basis in this kind of 
verifiable accessibility of what is not originally accessible. "122 The question is 
of knowing how, from the midst of my world, I am able to have the idea of the 
world of the other, at the heart of which is the other. 
Because of the fact that the world of our experience also includes others, 
things do not simply display natural determinations, but are also determined 
as objects of culture, as things molded by man, and in this way, endowed with 
predicates of value, or utility, etc. We are, thus, led beyond pure and simple 
nature. l23 
Must the idea of the world make us take up the idea of god? "The relation of 
my consciousness to a world is not a matter of fact imposed on me either by a 
god, who adventitiously decides it thus, or by a wor!d accidently existing 
beforehand, and a causal regularity belonging thereto. "124 Thus the idea of the 
world appears prior to that of god. There is, however, a subjective a priori 
which precedes the being of the world, as it does the being of a god. It seems 
nevertheless, that there would be a difference between the case of the world, 
and that of a god, although Husser! does not expressly call attention to this 
220 
point. Even admitting that the subjective a priori precedes the world, as it does 
a god, there is a much stronger bond between the world and this a priori, than 
there is between god and it. But this Husserl did not say. What he said is only 
that. in the case of a god, as in the case of the other, the fact that I posit the 
problem need not imply that it is I who imagines, and makes this higher 
transcendence. 
In this way, we are led to say some more about the idea oftranscendcnce in 
phenomenology. Husserl tells us that among lived-experiences, it is 
transcendently directed perceptions which posit being; that is, what we call 
external perceptions. 125 In the lectures on the Idea ol Phenomenology, 
Husser! tells us that what is mysterious and problematic in the possibility of 
cognition, is its transcendence: "All cognition of the natural sort, and 
especially the prescientific, is cognition which makes its object transcendent, 
it posits its objects as existent, claims to reach matters of fact which arc not 
'strictly given' to it, are not 'immanent' to it. "126 Husser! distinguishes two 
senses of the world "transcendence." In the first sense, he wishes to express the 
fact that the object of cognition is not really contained in the act of cognition, 
the word "real" taken here as synonymous with the word "immanent." The 
thing that cognition signifies, and that it claims to perceive, or to remember, 
cannot be found in the cogitatio itself. taken as a lived-experience, and cannot 
be considered an clement of it. I n the second sense, the word "transcendence" 
applies to all non-evident cognitions which intend, or posit, something 
objective, but which do not intuit it. This second transcendence is opposed to 
a second sort of immanence, which is the fact that something is an absolute 
and clear given, self-givenness in the absolute sense. Husser! remarks that 
there is often confusion between these two sorts of immanence and 
transcendence, in so far as a deeper critical interpretation has not been 
introduced. He observes that someone who rejects the first position, that is to 
say, that of the possibility of the first transcendence, brings the second sense 
into play at the core of the first, that is, tends to admit as given only that which 
is given evidently.127 At the end of the first lecture, he concludes that in all 
investigation of the theory of cognition, it is necessary to accomplish the 
reduction relative to that theory, that is, to affect all transcendence, which is 
here introduced, with the mark of exclusion, or with the mark of indifference, 
that is, to put completely out of play all transcendences. 12x 
We rediscover transcendence in the Cartesian Meditations: "This 
'transcendence' is part of the intrinsic sense of anything worldly .... "1'9 
Later, in the same work, he observes that transcendence, in each of its 
forms, is an immanent characteristic, constituted in the interior of the ego. 
"Every imaginable sense, every imaginable being, whether the latter is called 
immanent or transcendent, falls within the domain of transcendental 
subjectivity, as the subjectivity that constitutes being and scnse. "110 This 
affirmation leads him to the transcendental idealism of the Cartesian 
221 
Meditations. It is, nevertheless, true that all perception of the type that 
Husserl studied, is transcendent in the sense that it is an act by which there is 
posited something more than is simply there.l3I 
We are able, thus, to preserve two ideas from the Cartesian Meditations: 
the first is the distinction between the two transcendencies, and the assertion 
that there had been in the philosophical problematic, a confusion between the 
transcendent as different from the psychological given, and the transcendent 
as unclear and problematic by itself. The second is the affirmation, ultimately 
idealistic, of immanent transcendence. 
In the Formal and Transcendental Logic, perception is newly difined as 
self-giving, and as a self-giving of the transcendent: " ... in the manner of 
something instituted originally, this transcendence lies in the proper essence of 
the experience itself. "132 
What we have said of Husserl's attitude toward transcendence shows us the 
dual tendencies within his reflections, since after bringing to light the element 
of transcendence in perception, he tries to bring it back to immanence. But 
casting a glance at the different elements of phenomenology which we have 
revealed, we may ask ourselves whether all the stress on the pre-predicative, 
on the affective, on the intentional, and also on the hyletic, is not in danger of 
being lost, or, at least blurred, if, insisting too much on the immanence of 
transcendence, we neglect what has made us respect the phenomenon, that is, 
what, in consciousness, makes us apprehend that which is beyond 
consciousness. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
'Ricoeur says, in a note to his translation of Ideas, "The Phenomenology of 
Internal Time-Consciousness gave us the first analysis of phenomenological 
time, and opposed for the first time, retention or 'primary memory,' which still 
participates in immediate intuition, and recollection, memory properly so 
called. The lived-experience 'retained' in the present, is again a moment of the 
lived. Reflection rests on this 'retentional' structure of the lived-experience. 
P1TC, paragraphs 11-13; appendix I (pp. 84-86) on retention; paragraphs 14-18 
on recollection. Memory, or recollection, thus reflected upon, rests on a pre-
reflexive memory, on the property of the lived-experience of retaining the past: I 
perceive the same thing as 'coming to be as expected'; thus reflection is able to 
come after its object, and to uncover from the lived-experience what 'had been,' 
without having been reflected upon." Our translation. Ideas, F -- p. 248 n. 
NOTES TO THE TEXT 
I. See on this point, as on many of the following M. Merleau-Ponty. The 
Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith (New York: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1962); French ed., Phenomenologie de la perception, (Paris: 
222 
Editions Gallimard, 1945). In this article we have made use, on many occasions, 
of the excellent first part of the book by Tran-Duc-Thao. Phenomenologie el 
materialisme dialectique, (Paris: Editions Mihn-Tan, 1950). We have taken the 
liberty here, to take up again some citations which appeared in our article. 
"Notes on the first part of Experience and Judgment." Revue de /a 
mhaphysique et de mora/e. 1951. [Translated abovc.] 
2. FTL. E p. 155. F - p. 211. G - p. 139. 
3. Ibid., E - p. III. F - p. 152. G - pp. 98-99. 
4. J. E - p. 197. F - p. 238, G - p. 231. 
5. FTL. E - p. 314. F - pp. 408-9, G - p. 276. 
6. IP. E . p. 4. F - pp. 1067. G - p. 6. 
7. EJ, E - pp. 27-28, F p. 31, G - p. 22. 
8. Ibid., E - p. 126. F p. 149. G - p. 143. 
9. Ideas, our translation. E - pp. 356-57. F p. 467, G .. p. 340. 
10. eM, E - p. 57, F - pp. 48-49. G - p. 93. 
II. ThaD, our translation. p. 193. 
12. Ibid. 
13. Ibid., p. 202. 
14. FTL, E - p. Ill, F - p. 152. G - p. 99. 
15. 
J, E - p. 234, F - p. 283, G - p. 279. 
16. Ibid., E - p. 169. F - p. 202, G - p. 198. 
17. Ideas, our translation, E - p. 92, F - p. 89, G - p. 59. 
18. EJ, E - p. 32. F - p. 36, G - p. 27. This is a point on which the studies of M. 
Merleau-Ponty corroborated the assertions of Husser!. 
19. 
FTL, E - p. 156, F - p. 212, G - p. 139. 
20. Ibid., E - pp. 167-68, F - pp. 228-29, G - p. 150. 
21. 
Ibid., E - p. 314, F - p. 408, G - p. 276. 
22. Ibid., E - p. 302, F - p. 396. G .. p. 265. 
23. 
J, E - p. 46. F - pp. 53-54, G - p. 44. 
24. Ibid., E - pp. 19-20, F - pp. 22-23. G - p. 13. 
25. Ibid., E - p. 134, F - p. 158, G - p. 153. 
26. Ibid., E - pp. 29-30, F - p. 53, G . p. 24. 
27. Ibid., E 
p. 46. F .. p. 53, G - p. 44. 
28. FTL, E - p. 209, F - p. 283, G - p. 186. 
29. Ibid., E - p. 160, F - p. 217, G - p. 143. 
30. Ibid., E - pp. 209-210, F - p. 283, G - p. 186. 
31. Ibid., E - p. 235, F - p. 315, G - p. 208. 
32. Ideas. E - pp. 197-98. F - pp. 247-48, G - p. 179. 
33. FTL, E pp. 111-12, F - p. 152, G - p. 99. 
34. Ideas, our translation, E - p. 198, F - p. 248, G - p. 179. 
35. FTL, E - p. 337. F - p. 430, G - p. 295. 
36. EJ, E - p. 72, F - p. 84, G - p. 74. 
37. Ibid., E - p. 43, F - p. 50, G - p. 41. 
38. Ibid., E - p. 113, F - p. 132, G - p. 125. 
39. Ibid., E - p. 41, F - pp. 47-48, G - p. 38. 
40. Ibid .. E - p. 52, F - p. 61, G - p. 52. 
41. Ibid., E - p. 150, F - p. 178, G - p. 172. 
42. PL, E - p. 29, G - p. 29. 
43. J, E - p. 62, F - p. 72, G - p. 64. 
44. Ibid., E - p. 198, F - p. 238. G - p. 232. This region of passivity is also a region of 
223 
anonymity. Beneath the cogito we find a thinking, anonymous life, CM, E - p. 
74, F - p. 63, G - p. 84. 
45. FTL, E - p. 319, F - p. 412, G - p. 280. 
46. Thao, p. 174. 
47. [P, E - p. 19, F - p. 45, G - p. 23. 
48. FTL, E - p. 157, F - p. 213, G - p. 140. 
49. Ibid., E - pp. 161-62, F - pp. 219-20, G - pp. 144-45. 
50. Ibid., E - p. 278, F - p. 369, G - p. 246. Cited by Thao, p. 222. Citing the passage 
of Husserl in the scientific universe which is but a garb of ideas thrown over the 
world of intuition and immediate experience, Tran-Duc-Thao, in his most 
penetrating book mentioned above, said that, " ... the last analyses of Husserl, 
due to his genetic method, ended practically in a total skepticism; and the 
relativity of knowledge, for Husserl, must be understood in a sense which 
assimilates all types of truths." Our translation, Thao, pp. 221-22. But, in fact, 
we cannot speak here of a total skepticism unless we adopt a dogmatism which 
reduces everything to scientific cognition. And we can equally dispute the claim 
of an assimilation of all types of truths; they remain distinct, each having its own 
value. 
5!. Ibid., E - p. 278, F - pp. 369-70, G - pp. 245-46. 
52. Ideas, our translation, E - pp. 356-57, F - p. 267, G - p. 340. 
53. FTL, E - p. 135, F - p. 183, G - p. 120. 
54. Ibid., E - p. 210, F - p. 284, G - p. 186. 
55. EJ, E - pp. 29-30, F - p. 33, G - p. 24. 
56. CM, E - p. 61, F - p. 51, G - p. 96. 
57. Ibid., E - pp. 61-62, F - p. 52, G - p. 96. 
58. Ideas, E - p. 121, F - p. 136, G - p. 96. 
59. EJ, E - p. 287, F - p. 348, G - p. 346. 
60. Ibid. 
6!. Ibid., E - p. 288, F - p. 349, G - pp. 346-47. 
62. Thao, our translation, p. 138. 
63. FTL, E - p. 202, F - p. 173, G - p. 179. 
64. Ibid., E - p. 192, F - p. 259, G - p. 170. 
65. Thao, our translation, p. 191. 
66. Ibid., p. 192. 
67. Ideas, our translation, E - p. 292, F - p. 380, G - p. 274. 
68. FTL, E - p. 199, F - p. 269, G - p. 177. 
69. EJ, E - pp. 149-50, F - p. 177, G - pp. 171-72. 
70. FTL, E - p. 251, F - p. 335, G - pp. 221-22. 
71. Ibid., E - p. 283, F - p. 376, G - p. 250. 
72. EJ, E - p. 30, F - p. 35, G - p. 25. 
73. Ibid., E - pp. 162-63, F - p. 163, G - p. 157. 
74. Ibid., E - p. 41, F - pp. 47-48, G - p. 38. 
75. Ibid., E - p. 30, F - p. 33, G - p. 24. 
76. Ibid., E - p. 34, F - pp. 38-39, G - p. 29. 
77. Ibid., E - p. 43, F - p. 50, G - p. 41. 
78. Cf. on this point, M. Merleau-Ponty, The Phenomenology of Perception, and 
the study, "Cezanne's Doubt," in Sense and Non-Sense, trans. H. Dreyfus 
(Evanston: l\"orthwestern University Press, 1964); French ed., Sens et non-sens, 
(Paris: Editions Nagel, 1961). 
79. FTL, E - p. 240, F - p. 323, G - p. 213. 
224 
80. CM, E - p. 106, F - p. 89, G - p. 136. 
81. Ibid., E - p. 110, F - pp. 92-93, G - p. 140. 
82. EJ, E - p. 153, F - pp. 181-82, G - pp. 175-76. 
83. Ibid., E - p. 158, F - p. 188, G - pp. 182-83. 
84. Ibid., E - p. 159, F - pp. 188-89, G - pp. 183-84. 
85. Ibid., E - p. 157, F - pp. 185-86, G - p. 180. 
86. Ibid., E - p. 185, F - pp. 221-22, G - p. 218. 
87. Ibid., E - p. 45, F - p. 52, G - p. 43. 
88. FTL, E - p. 79, F - p. 109, G - pp. 69-70. 
89. EJ, E - p. 186, F - p. 222, G - p. 219. 
90. Ibid., E - p. 43, F - p. 50, G - p. 41. 
91. Ibid., E - p. 34, F - pp. 38-39, G - p. 29. 
92. FTL, E - p. 287, F - p. 380, G - p. 253. 
93. EJ, E - p. 107, F - p. 125, G - p. 118. 
94. Ibid., E - p. 107, F - p. 126, G - p. 118. Cf. E - p. 112, F - p. 131, G p. 124. 
95. Thao, our translation, pp. 143-44 notes. 
96. Ideas, E - p. 204, F - p. 257, G - pp. 184-85. 
97. IP, E - p. 59, F - p. 100, G - p. 74. 
98. FTL, E - p. 158, F - p. 147, G - p. 141. 
99. Ideas, E - p. 202, F - p. 254, G - p. 182. 
100. Thao, our translation, p. 139 n. 
101. Ideas, E - p. 130, F - p. 149, G - p. 107. CM IV + V. Cf. also Ms. C21: "Dieses 
zugleich ist stromendes zugleich." Cited by Thao, p. 143 n. 
102. EJ, E - p. 160, F - p. 191, G - pp. 185-86. 
103. Thao, our translation, p. 139. 
104. CM, E - p. 127, F - p. lOS, G - p. 156, Cf. M. Merleau-Ponty, "Phenomenology 
and the Sciences of Man," in The Primacy of Perception, trans. J. Wild 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), pp. 49-50; French ed., "Lcs 
Sciences de I'homme et la phenomenologie," (Centre de Documentation 
Universitaire: Paris), p. 8. 
105. EJ, E - p. 261, F - pp. 315-16, G - p. 313. 
106. Ideas, E - p. 200-20 I, F - p. 252, G - p. 181. 
107. EJ, E - p. 90, F - p. 105, G - p. 97. 
108. Ibid., E - p. 91, F - p. 107, G - p. 98. 
109. PL, E - p. 18, G - pp. 18-19. 
110. CM, E - p. 44, F - p. 38, G - pp. 81-S2. 
III. See Thao on this, p. 209 n. 
112.IP,E-p.10,F-p.115,G-p.13. 
113. EJ, E - p. 255 n, F - p. 308, G - p. 151. 
114. Ibid., E - p. 132. F - p. 156, G - p. 151. 
115. Ideas, E - p. 291, F - pp. 378-79, G - p. 274. 
116. FTL, E - pp. 115-16, F - p. 212, G - p. 139. 
117. Ibid., E - p. 165, F - p. 224, G - p. 147. 
lIS. PL, E - p. IS, G - p. IS. 
119. EJ, E - pp. 35, 60-61, 83, 107-IOS; F - pp. 40-41, 70-71, 97-9S, 125-126; 
G - pp. 31,62,88,118. 
120. Thao, pp. 172, 216. 
121. 
CM, E - p. 96, F - p. 80, G - p. 127. 
122. Ibid., E - p. 114, F - p. 97, G - p. 144. 
123. 
EJ, E - p. 13S, F - pp. 163-64, G - p. 15S. 
124. 
FTL, E - p. 251, F - p. 335, G - p. 222. 
225 
125. Ideas, E - p. 291, F - p. 378, G - p. 274. 
126. IP, E - p. 27, F - p. 59, G - pp. 34-35. 
127. Ibid., E - p. 28, F - pp. 60-61, G - pp. 35-36. 
128. Ibid., E - p. 31, F - p. 65, G - p. 39. 
129. eM, E - p. 26, F - p. 22, G - p. 65. 
130. Ibid., E - p. 84, F - p. 71, G - p. II7. 
131. Ibid., E - p. 122, F - p. 103, G - p. 151. 
132. FTL, E - pp. 164,223; F - pp. 233, 312-13; G - pp. 146,206. 
THE SPECIFIC CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL ACCORD]NG TO 
HUSSERL* 
RENE TOULEMO:'\"T 
HusserJ did not hesitate to apply the methods of eidetic phenomcnology to 
social phenomena, understanding by this the descriptive but systematic study 
of essences. Nor did he limit himself to it either: social facts are phenomena 
amongst many others. it does not seem necessary to accord them special 
consideration. Paradoxically, it was at the point where, elaborating the simply 
eidetic phenomenology in order to give philosophy a firm and scientific 
foundation, and believing himself. by a move which recaptures and revises the 
Cartesian Cogito, to have found it in the individual subject and in the domain 
which is its own, what he called the Transcendental ego and the 
monadological sphere, that H usserl was led to envisage and to study social 
being. If there is unshakable certainty only for the subject itself. then there is 
no hope for a philosophy and a science which, by definition, seek to establish 
theories valid for all. ]t is necessary. at all costs. to surmount solipsism; the 
reduction of the social worJd must lead to a phenomenology of society. 
Husserl left us many investigations on the fundamental problems of 
sociology. although he never gave them a systematic treatment. The only one 
of these investigations which was known for a long time was the fifth 
Cartesian 
Meditation, 
which, 
nevertheless, 
is 
open 
to 
misleading 
interpretation, for, even if it represented, until recently, the principal 
document concerning the experience of the other,l ,il the properly social fact 
according to Husser!, cannot be discerned there. The Crisis, which contains 
analyses utilizable by the sociologist, was known also, but its center of interest 
is, rather, the philosophy of history. Moreover, the completc text of this work 
was published only after HusserJ's death. Among the other posthumous 
publications, the most important from the sociological perspective is ldeen II. 
but the theory of society appears there only in an embryonic form.2 The 
significance of the published texts can hardly be grasped other than by 
comparing them to the unpublished texts which have directly sociological 
themes.' It is also through these central texts that the sociological importance 
*T ranslated by Laurence E. Winters from "La spccificitedu social c\',lprcs Husser!." 
Cahiers international/x de soci%gie. 25 (1958). pp. 135 51. 
226 
227 
of a mass of connected analyses, and, as well, the incidental remarks dispersed 
throughout the manuscripts, may be comprehended. 
We will not attempt here to display the theories of H usserl on life in society 
in their totality.4 We will be content, after having traced the major lines of his 
conception concerning the origin and nature of human society, to investigate 
what response Husserlian phenomenology is able to give to one of the most 
classical questions of sociology: that of the specific nature of the social. 
Numerous and diverse phenomena converge in the appearance of social 
facts and in the formation of societies. In a first stage. individuals group 
themselves by virtue of their parental bonds and, in a general manner, 
following imtinctivc relationships. On the other hand, the cultural elements 
such as religion and science, played and still play an important role in the 
formations of certain peoples, and of certain groups. But amongst all these 
factors of social constitution, the latter presuppose the pre-existence of the 
state of society, and the former are pre-social. Doubtlessly, biological and 
instinctive phenomena establish internal relations between humans, but they 
precede the exercise of consciousness and, in all cases, self-consciousness, 
which is specific to humanity. "The activity of the individual subjects 
developed on the grounds of an obscure blind passivity; this is true as well of 
social activity."5 
One can only have society by virtue of an internal relationship between its 
members. A society is specifically human by virtue of an internal relationship 
which is established at the level of consciousness, and which binds humans as 
conscious beings. The problem is, then, to find the specific point where the 
relation between humans becomes a human relationship, to disclose the 
phenomenon which brings about this mutation, and which does not 
presuppose any other of a similar type as prior. This is the problem of the 
phenomenon essential to the formation of human society, of the phenomenon 
which is, essentially, its origin. 
This original phenomenon might be believed to be "intersubjectivity." The 
first transcendence [depassement] of solipsism consists in the experience of 
the other. through which the subject recognizes the existence before him of a 
being which is similar to him; this operation can repeat itself, and the 
experience of the other become that of intersubjectivity, of an open multitude 
of subjects conscious of themselves and conscious of each other. Doesn't 
"intersubjectivity" imply the relation of consciousnesses, since all conceivable 
subjects could be reciprocally included in their respective fields of 
consciousness? Doesn't it entail the constitution of a surrounding world 
which, for them, is "common," and which they recognize as such? 
However, intersubjectivity is not the only fundamental social phenomenon, 
for it does not create the effective union of consciousnesses, and does not 
display any act which would be truly common to two or more subjects. I am 
able to see the same thing, and thus to accomplish an act of perception which 
228 
has the same object as that of the other. This makes two acts which converge 
on a point, outside of our two consciousnesses. If we apperceive one another. 
and are conscious of it, there is definitely a convergence, but not a union of 
consciousnesses. My act and his are not only distinct, but, as well do not unite 
to form a single, and unique total act; they are simultaneous. juxtaposed, 
tangential, their fields overlap, but they are not essentially directed by each 
other. Each one understands for himself, and is sufficient to himself. The other 
[autruzJ remains literally an other [autre]; I take no part in his activity. and he 
participates in no way in mine. "The fact of existing for the others and at the 
same time of having in common with them the same spatio-temporal 
surroundings . . . does not count as being 'socially' united within a 
community. "0 
For Husser!, the elementary social phenomenon, at the specifically human 
level, is communication. "All social unity has for a foundation ... the actual 
relationship that is community through the exchange of thoughts, the simple 
community that is realized through discourse and the reception of discourse 
or, more clearly, by the fact of speaking and hearing."7 
Communication 
is 
a 
complex 
phenomenon which 
requires 
the 
combination. and the superposition of many activities. It evidently 
presupposes the experience of the others, and of an environing world common 
to the subjects involved. But. in addition to these general conditions, other 
preparatory stages must be passed through: the experience of the others must 
be reciprocal and attentive: the reciprocity and the attentiveness must be 
comprised by each of the subjects face to face. and this, moreover, must be 
manifested in their mutual comprehension. The essential aspects of the 
phenomenon of communication itself are: on the part of the subject who takes 
the initiative, the deliberate resolve to manifest his thought to the other. and 
the manifesting of it in the form of a discourse, of a language which normally, 
but not necessarily. is oral; on the part of the subject whom he addresses, 
attention turned toward the discourse, comprehension of the discourse. and 
the manifestation of the comprehension by either an expressive attitude, or by 
another discourse. The agreement on the object of the communication and on 
the conclusion which the communicating subject desires. deepens and 
reinforces the union of the speakers, but it is not essential. 
The relation realized through communication, by means of discourse. is a 
human social phenomenon, and is the very first one. It is a relation which is 
effectuated at the level of functional consciousness. It is established between 
two conscious subjects by means of active operations. It is a relation where I 
do not only accomplish certain acts, and am not only understood by the other 
as the author of these acts, but where the accomplishment of an act which is 
my own, motivates in the other the accomplishment of a complimentary act, 
in the form of an act of reception, confirming my intention to "say" something 
to him. The act of speaking is inconceivable without the act of listening and 
229 
reciprocally; they cannot exist without each other, and have sense only in 
being constituted entirely by each other. It is the relationship which is the first 
of this type, for it is the condition of all the unities of subjects, who could not 
agree on a theory, ona project, on an action, if they did not know what was the 
matter at hand. Their lives could not be unified at the conscious level if, first, 
there was not communication between their consciousnesses. 
* 
* 
* 
Communication opens access to the state of society. For society to exist, it is 
necessary, in addition, that the unity of subjects be made and developed 
through the content of the communications, and it is necessary that the unity, 
which is evanescent in communication, acquire a certain permanence. 
The extension of the effective unity of subjects is realized, first of all, on the 
level of sensible experience. "We do not see, we do not hear, etc. only next to 
each other, but as well, with each other. ''8 By the very fact of the experience of 
the other, we know already that the others would see and hear the same things 
as us. But the communication creates a quite different state of affairs: it gives 
us a world which is not only the "same," "identical" for all the subjects who are 
mutually familiar with it, but which, while remaining identical, is most truly 
"common." That which I do not perceivl~ of a particular object and, in general, 
of the surrounding world, the others perceive, and that which they do not 
perceive, I perceive. In communicating our respective experiences, we obtain a 
total experience of an object and of a milieu, which unifies our particular 
experiences, which are partially different, granting them the status of 
complimentary experience, of "moments" of a single and unique, collective 
experience. 
The unification of subjects is continued by the unification of efficient 
operations, by actions properly speaking, expressing the union of wills. It is 
thus that the "community," the collective unity, appears as a real existent in 
the world. "The community arises from an interpenetration of wills and from 
willed ends in the form of a community of plans and of labor, and the work 
that results is their common product. ''9 The accomplished deed is not a set of 
similar and parallel products of many agents, but a unique work that, due to 
the union of the efforts of all, is a common accomplishment. "In all these cases 
where we know ourselves bound unilaterally or reciprocally, by an intention 
such that it produces a unity of active work bearing on the common 
surrounding world ... the individual person without doubt works, but he 
embraces with his consciousness the other persons in the work and that which 
has been accomplished by them .... "10 
Collectivation or socialization is able to effect all the modalities of the life of 
conscious subjects. That which is true of cognitive sensibility and laboring 
activity, is equally valid for affective sensibility, for our feelings, our needs, 
230 
our tendencies, and for the activities which follow from them. At the opposite 
extreme, the rational life, thought properly speaking, active, logical, and 
scientific, is also susceptible of taking on collective forms. 
Thus instrumental social unions are formed, actual communities, in the 
double sense of communities which are constituted by means of acts, of 
operations of aware subjects, and of communities which are constituted in the 
present, at the actual moment. In order for there to exist an authentically 
human community, this aspect of activity, in the form, at least, of attentive 
consciousness, and this aspect of temporal actuality, is absolutely required. 
But consciousness cannot ever be entirely active, and its activity leaves 
traces in the form of relatively permanent acquisitions, "gains" [Erwerbe]. 
These essential traits of individual consciousness are again found in the 
collective consciousness. Through oral, as well as written communication, thc 
acquisitions of the one are able to become the benefit of the others; a 
considerable set of collective acquisitions is called culture. Through 
communication, assuring the transmission of the acquisitions, a society can 
perpetuate itself, and cooperation can be realized in succession as in co-
existence. The permanence of the results permits the union of persons across 
time, and the union across time confers the historical dimension on the 
community. 
Social unions do not all have the same degree of depth and intimacy. 
Although they transcend the importance of simple communication, many 
establish between their members only loose, or very delimited relations: this is 
what is observed in informal parties. They found a certain unity which is, for 
the most part, felt by the participants, since they designate themselves by the 
pronoun "we," but this "we" is momentary. To the contrary, an association 
ruled by statutes, and fixed by definite goals, a city and its population unified 
under a municipal administration, or, as well, a nation unified into a state, are 
societies in the full sense of the term. There the union of persons is as durable 
as it is because it is cemented by means of a group of collective acquisitions. 1 t 
is penetrated by a functional, collective will. These communities are unified in 
a manner analogous to the individual, and possess a sort of "I," around which 
are centered, and to which are related, collective operations. A society of this 
type is what H usserl called a "person of a higher degree. "11 The notion of 
person is, thus, a generic concept which includes in its extension two types: the 
individual person, and the collective person. 12 A supra-personal consciousness 
is formed, but one which operates like the consciousness of a person, which 
lives in all the participants, which flows into them and yet, at the same time, 
emanates from them: it is the "collective spirit" [Gemeingeisr]. 
* 
* 
* 
To grasp the specific nature of the social, it is indispensable, according to 
Husserl, to transcend what he calls the natural attitude, which consists in 
231 
attributing to all the beings in the world the mode of existence of material 
things. In this attitude, a human is considered as a body, and psychic 
phenomena, as derivative reality, caused by the physical and organic 
phenomena. Human bodies do not form between them a spatial continuity. 
Since there is no immediate action at a distance, the psychic lives which have 
their seats in bodies are, and remain, separately situated realities within the 
spatio-temporal extension of the universe. The only psychology which is at 
first possible is individual psychology, studying the general aspects present 
identically in the separate selves. Individual psychology is, then, the 
foundation of social psychology, of sociology, and the study of cultural 
phenomena. 13 Moreover, societies do not form realities of a new type, and do 
not involve anything original from the psychological point of view. 
Everything which can be asserted concerning them are the manifestations of 
individual psychic beings, relating themselves to alien psychic individuals. If 
one takes the natural attitude, sociology cannot be anything but an 
interpsychology, for individuals, alone, have real existence. 14 
To the contrary, when the personalist attitude is adopted, which sees in 
subjects beings endowed with intentionality, society and social relations need 
no longer be perceived through the intermediary of individual psychology. 
The experience of the other, and the experience of social life, do not appeal to 
the exact and causal laws of nature. Without doubt, the subject knows the 
other through sensible phenomena, and corporeal manifestations, but he does 
not consider the body separately, and still less as a thing. Similarly, in a social 
relation such as communication, the subject directly grasps the relationship 
between his own acts and those of his co-speakers, their motivation through 
the foreign acts, and the union of the one with the other. All of this is grasped 
in and by consciousness, without the intrusion of any causal, and law-like 
element. 
* 
* 
* 
A social phenomenon and, with good reason, a true society, cannot be 
confused with a sum, the arithmetical sum of acts, or of individual beings 
which compose it. A given sum disappears as such, as one removes from it one 
or several unities, but this is not the case with a social group which subsists as 
such, after the death, the expulsion, or the voluntary departure of even a 
considerable number of its adherents. "The nation is not a sum of 
individual persons, what would result from the death of certain individuals 
would not be the destruction of the existence of the nation."15 
An arithmetical sum is the result of an operation which presupposes 
another, prior operation: the perception of a plurality, or rather, of a 
"collection." Couldn't society simply have the being of a collection? Husser! 
denies this expressly.16 To understand this denial, we must return to a 
conception which he sought to elaborate in the first of his works, and which he 
232 
never disa vowed .17 A set appears as such to our eyes by means of an operation 
called "collective relation" [kollektive Verb in dung] , in which a unique 
interest, an effort of attention unites objects of consciousness with different 
contents into a whole. "If we ask ourselves what the relationship consists in 
when, for example, we think a plurality of things as disparate as redness, the 
moon, and Napoleon, we obtain the response that it consists uniquely in the 
fact that we think these contents together, that we think of them by a unique 
act. "18 However, most collections must have their unity in addition to their 
"objective" elements, in the sense that they are not uniquely constituted by 
considering their components at the same time, and by a single "glance" of 
consciousness. The apprehension of a collection is facilitated by what Husser! 
calls "figurative moments" [diefiguralen Momente], that is to say, on the one 
hand, by virtue of the identity, or of the considerable sensible similarity of 
each of their elements, and, on the other hand, by their "figure," or their 
"form," by their "configuration," by their gathering in space or in time. It is 
under these conditions that we perceive a heap of apples, or a swarm of bees 
and, with the intervention of temporal "configuration," a melodic suite, or the 
twelve chimes of midnight. 19 
A social being and a being which is simply put together; a society and a 
collection are similar in that, in each case, there is a plurality of similar 
elements, and a certain unity of the whole. But, from the start, the elements of 
a social phenomenon, or of a social being, are not any being whatever: they 
must be living beings and, what is more, alert conscious beings. M oreover- and 
this is essential, for it is not inconceivable that conscious beings form simple 
collections - the social phenomenon and, above all, society properly speaking, 
requires a kind of unity completely different than that of a collective 
assemblage. The unity of the collection is purely external. When its elements 
are disparate, the unity is due to nothing other than the conscious act that 
collects them into a whole. When the elements form part of a "configuration," 
their connection is purely spatio-temporal, thus again, completely external; 
when the elements are identical, or similar, this similarity facilitates the act of 
joining effectuated by consciousness, but this does not mean that they are, 
themselves, intrinsically tied together. On the contrary, the communal unity 
entails internal connection of the component elements, that is to say, of the 
subjects, by means of their acts and their works.20 "My life is a life in my we 
and our life is, through and through, a life with, for, and against others, and, 
thus, in all cases, a life consisting not in an external collection ofthings that are 
united in space and time, but in an internal participation of the life of the 
others through experience, thought, caring, love, or adversion, etc. ",,1 
* 
* 
* 
In emphasizing the unity of subjects in society, Husserl is led to a 
comparison with unities of the physical order and of the organic order. 
233 
Subjects which find thems.elves involv~:d in a social relation, and, still more, 
those who form a "person of a higher degree" are truly, "a subject-whole, in a 
certain sense, a subjectivity composed of individual subjects - in a manner 
similar to that in which a physical whole is a physical object, composed of 
physical objects as parts. "22 On the other hand, "the collective person, a 
collective spirituality . . . is actually and truly personal, there is a higher 
concept of essence here, that unites the individual person and the collective 
person, there is an analogy here, exactly as there is an analogy between a cell 
and an organism composed of cells, this is not a simple image, but a generic 
community. ''23 Elsewhere H usserl, in attempting to set up a program of 
studies for the phenomenology of history, raised the problems posed by social 
"organization," by hierarchies of persons, where lower echelons serve as 
"organs" for higher echelons, as well as by the historical evolution of these 
"organisms. ''24 Must we see in these claims a return to naturalism and, more 
particularly, a profession of organicism? 
Not at all. Husserl's phenomenology makes evident the traits which 
essentially distinguish the unity of a physical whole and those of the unity of a 
social whole. The connections between physical realities are effected in the 
form of causes which bind them to each other externally; social bonds are 
effectuated in the form of motives which penetrate into the interior of the 
consciousness. Many bodies may be in relation, and exercise mutual action on 
each other. This does not mean that they unify themselves, that they have 
made their union. "Communication creates the unity. Separate things remain 
exterior to each other; they can never have any identity in common. But 
consciousness actually coincided with consciousness ... ''25 placing acts, the 
contents of which are identical, into conscious and effective connection with 
each other. In one and the same body, the parts which are contiguous, or even 
continuous, do not overlap; what belongs to one, does not belong to the other. 
What is more, physical causality is exercised under completely different 
conditions than personal "causality," of which social "causality" is only a 
particular case. "My past decisions become alive again in the memory that 
reproduces them and exercises now a new and immediate effectiveness. This is 
unlike the case in nature, where an action takes place continuously in time and 
where each moment includes in itself the residue of the effect of what has 
preceded and where each temporal instant is alone real and contains in itself 
all causality. "26 Physical action, properly understood, is able to propagate and 
it can be asked how long it takes. But this propagation proceeds step by step, it 
is continuous and irreversible. Only the energy which is present at the instant 
is exercised. Physical action is instantaneous in the sense that it is propagated 
uniquely, from instant to instant, and from the present instant to the one 
which immediately succeeds it. Consciousness, to the contrary, is not a 
prisoner of the instants, and their irreversible continuity. Through memory, it 
can revive the contents of past acts, sometimes separated from the present by a 
234 
long temporal "distance." Bringing about a return from the past, it transcends 
the irreversibility; overcoming the distance, it liberates itself from physical 
continuity. The past relived is able to act with the force of present forces. "The 
past I exercises on itself action at a distance. ''27 In society, the relations 
between subjects, and their bonds, are due, properly, in large part, to the 
permanence of the efficacy of past acts, in other words, to the "overlapping" of 
the present by the past, and not to the passage of what one could call a "wave" 
of causality. Finally, the action of things is exercised in virtue of absolutely 
permanent properties, according to characteristics determined once and for 
all; the properties of collective subjects are, essentially, relatively variable, and 
the action of the past, or of acquisitions is not constant.28 If there is 
"composition" in the social whole as there is in the physical whole, the manner 
in which elements in each are composed, or are bound, is essentially different. 
The fundamental conception proposed by H usserl concerning human 
society is not organicist. The lowest social phenomenon of the human plane 
displays, as we have seen, a decisive transcendence of the biological level. 
Society has a development, an "evolution," much like an organism, but its 
evolution proceeds on the foundation of results acquired by conscious 
activities, and preserved, or put aside by the collective consciousness. 
"Evolution ... is a meaning structure. ''29 Like an organism, society includes a 
multiplicity of actions which are combined in different degrees. The lower 
complex unities are united to form social systems comparable to systems of 
organs, but all that presupposes the exercise of effective, collective 
consciousness, and of the participating individual consciousnesses. The most 
unified forms of the social life are the "persons of a higher degree," where a 
central consciousness embraces, to a certain extent, the individual 
consciousnesses, just as in an organism, the life of the whole dominates, and 
regulates the life of the cells. But the central ego does not totally absorb the 
particular egos, it imposes itself on them only to a certain extent, and, in every 
way, the life of the whole presupposes the activity of the individual 
consciousnesses, in the form of a functional participation. Moreover, to the 
extent that the social whole dominates its parts, it is precisely after the manner 
of a consciousness. There is an analogy between the individual person and the 
collective person, "exactly as" there is between the cell and the organism, but 
Husserl did not say that it is "exactly the same" analogy. 
Human society forms a successive whole,just as an organism is one from its 
birth to its death. But we must not be mistaken about the sense of this 
successive social unity. Human generations are evidently tied together by way 
of descent and ancestry. But,just as the linking of successive phenomena at the 
core of individual consciousness is not sufficient to give it the status of a 
temporal consciousness, physical and organic geneology does not constitute 
the historical unity between the persons of the present, and those of a past 
time. This unity is situated on the level of consciousness, which, now, is a 
235 
collective consciousness. Historical unity across the generations requires, first 
of all, in the persons of the present time, the consciousness of those who have 
passed, then the consciousness of the works which they effectuated, and, 
finally, the recognition of the valid results they obtained. In that way, the 
present generation recognizes itself as tributary to the past generations, 
collecting the heritage in the form of traditions and, on these traditional 
foundations, continuing the work which they had begun, to the end of 
enriching the culture destined to be transmitted to future generations. The 
historical bond through the epochs of each human society is that of genealogy, 
a specifically spiritual genealogy.3o Human society is the only one which 
creates a culture, and this is one of the essential characteristics that 
distinguishes it from animal societies. Even in the most 'social' of animals, 
there are no spiritual inheritances which serve as 'premises' for the works of 
the following generations. A given generation takes no account of what had 
been done by their predecessors. The work of each is a kind of absolute 
beginning; each swarm undertakes to construct its hive as if there had never 
been a hive in the world. A human society always has biological foundations, 
but as the example of political society shows, and it could not be shown more 
clearly, it cannot be reduced to them. Even though the members of a nation 
are united by ties of blood, to these are added juridical bonds: at the heart of 
the nation, not only infants, but future citizens are born.3l 
* 
* 
* 
Human society is, then, neither a sum, nor a collection for it is endowed 
with an internal unity; it is neither composed, nor unified in the same way as a 
physical whole, or as an organism. But this is not sufficient to warrant the 
specificity of the social. We apprehend that the social unity is quite real, 
although it does not exist in the same mode as physical things. We apprehend 
that the idea of social personality is not a fiction, and that the concept of 
"collective spirit," about which German Idealism had spoken, is not a 
"mystical" concept,32 a fruit of the Romantic Imagination.33 But we still do 
not know if social unity essentially differs from individual unity. As Hussed 
wished, let us grant that the notion of person is a generic concept which has 
two types in its extension: the individual person, and the collective person. 
:The problem is, then, to determine the specific differences, and, for that, we 
must be able to define not only social being, but also individual being. 
Now, Husserl ceaselessly underlined the similarity, the "parallelism," of 
individual consciousness and collective consciousness.34 The comparisons can 
be reduced to three kinds. The first consists in analyzing a phenomenon given 
in individual consciousness, then in demonstrating that it exists equally in the 
collective consciousness. It is thus that Hussed saw in memory and the 
individual's acquisitions the prefiguratiion of history, and of culture, as social 
236 
facts. The second type of comparison is more complex. It consists in calling 
attention to the similarities which exist between the relations of the 
phenomena situated in individual consciousness. and the relationships 
between different consciousnesses. or. to speak the language of Tarde. the 
similarities of intra-individual relations. and of inter-individual relations. It is 
thus that Husserl attempted to establish a "parallel between my community 
with myself and my community with others. "15 The third is still more complex. 
since he laid side by side the inter-individual relations and the relations 
between social unities. groups. and societies. Individuals are able to establish 
social bonds between them; likewise. a social group has the faculty offorming 
a bond. as a group. with another group. and. moreover. with individual 
persons, to constitute a collectivity of a higher degree. Friendships and 
hostilities are formed between collectivities as between individuals.16 
Taken separately. the comparisons might be correct. But, by mUltiplying 
the similarities. we will end in going beyond the analogy, and reaching an 
identity. If everything which happens. and is observed in individual 
consciousness. is encountered equally in collective consciousness. there is no 
longer any essential difference between the individual and the society. but 
merely a difference of degree. that is to say. of scope and duration. 
For a long time, Husserl reflected on the problem of individuation. and 
devoted a great number of investigations to it, directly, or indirectlyY Most 
often. however. these reflections and investigations concerned the individual 
as opposed to the general, consequently, what must, rather, be called the 
singular. Moreover, they concerned the individuality of the phenomena of 
consciousness. for example, of an acoustic perception, rather than of a 
concrete being. that of the subject, or of the individual person. Besides. the 
concept of individuation held by Husserl is verified as well on the level of the 
collectivity as on that of the individual properly speaking. The individuation 
of a phenomenon depends, fundamentally. on its unique situation in the 
unfolding of consciousness, and, secondly, on its uniqueness in objective 
space and time. From this point of view. a phenomenon. or a social being, is 
equally individual and singular. "The 'form' of the world in which man ... 
lives ... is an individual form. Each mcmber of this world. that is to say, each 
member belonging to the same community that is my we. describes the same 
and necessarily the same individual form. A Chinese. to the extent that he does 
not belong to it. describes an other. ... ",8 
Husserl's analyses would allow one to understand why Europe is not China. 
why France is not Germany, and why Pierre is not Jacques, nor Helmut or 
Siegfried. They would, as well, allow us to rigorously grasp the difference 
between Siegfried and Germany, or between Pierre and France. As opposed to 
individual habit. costumes and traditions. social phenomena would appear as 
universals. as general facts in a given milieu. 'The generaL habitual uniformity 
of life, custom. develops. in the community. from such habits. in the same way 
237 
as the individual develops under normal conditions, by imitation, taking on 
what is suggested and called for by others. "39 But they do not allow a clear 
solution to the problem of the distinction between the notion of individuality, 
and that of society, or, speaking with Husser!, between the "general forms"4o 
of individuality and community. 
H usserl does not seem to have been preoccupied explicitly and thematically 
with this special aspect of the problem of individuation. On this precise point, 
we can glean from him only a few remarks, which are always episodic, and 
sometimes banal - as when he notes that the individual has only one body, 
whereas there are many in society41 - or much too fleeting to be utilizable.42 
In H usserL there are echoes of Tarde, for example when he partially 
attributes the formation of customs to suggestive imitation, but, more often 
still, of Durkheim, from whom, to a ce-rtain extent, he derives, or reproduces 
implicitly, the distinction between strict and diffuse constraint. To the extent 
that it is not customary, law has a determinate origin, which is known, or at 
least knowable. Juridical obligation has its source in the will of the Prince, of a 
legislative assembly, of the state. This is an externally imposed obligation. 
"The state is a unity created by force, by domination."43 However, the 
government does not always have the need to resort to force; in the long run, 
the subjects adopt the habit of subordination, and acquire a permanent 
disposition to act voluntarily, as members of the society, in the sense desired 
by those who govern them.44 Tradition and custom have their origin in a 
relatively indeterminate collectivity, the reference to which is manifested in 
the recourse to the indefinite pronoun "one." "The point of view of custom is 
that in which we situate ourselves, whcn, concerning our actions, we ask 
ourselves aloud, or quietly to ourselves: what would one say about it? What 
judgement would one pass on it?"45 The norms, the totality of which constitute 
custom, do not even need to be expressed internally. "These norms have their 
validity in the mode of the 'one', they rule practice without being 
formulated. "46 Like juridical obligation, customary norms have an origin 
external to thc individual: "Action, in the sense of custom, which we have 
again and again been trained to perform from our childhood, and then further 
in social relations, have in themselves, for those that execute them, the 
phenomenological character of that which is imposed from the outside. "47 
Morality is close to law, and to tradition, in that it has a general importance 
within a given milieu, but limited to this milieu, and that it is felt as coming 
from the outside. Action which one praises is. as a general rule, approved by 
witnesses in the same way as vice is blamed, and these judgements are 
reci procal. "The agent knows himself praised or blamed by a normal spectator 
as he would praise or blame the others in a similar case. He judges himself with 
the eyes of t he others. "4~ 
But the "externality" of the law, of custom, of tradition, of morality, is 
something completely different than the externality which characterizes 
238 
physical action of material beings. Social constraint acts by means of a 
motive: one assents to the general custom, or to the will of the state, in so far as 
they are known. This knowledge interiorizes them, establishes an intrinsic and 
effective bond between the consciousnesses, and it is only through this that 
constraint becomes social. Custom, as custom, "is characterized by the social 
ought in this sense ... that it is accompanied by the thought of society as social 
subject, as a unified collectivity of persons who evaluate, approve, and 
disapprove .... "49. Furthermore, and above all, the facts of suggestion, as those 
of "strict" or "diffuse" constraint, represent to Husserl nothing but possible 
forms of human social union, those that are in the category of heteronomy. 
But the specific character of man is reason; and the rational life, theoretical and 
practical, is characterized by autonomy. The theoretical, philosophical, and 
scientific activity of man remains traditional, historical, and thus social, but 
"reactive" to traditions in order to apprehend their validity. The ethical life 
consists in realizing between consciousnesses the most intimate union that 
could be conceived, but by virtue of a free decision, taken in the light of 
rational evidence, that the devotion to the community is tht: best means of 
promoting the value of the self. 
The essence of society is not found in constraint or in some analogous 
phenomenon. The aspect of constraint cannot serve to characterize the social 
in relation to the individual. The problem remains. Social being is constituted 
by the intrinsic bond of a plurality of conscious phenomena. But an intrinsic 
bond of the same type may be ascertained as well in individual consciousness. 
Where, then, is the essential difference, if there is one, between "sociality" 
and individuality? If we hold to Husserl's analyses, a single response seems 
possible: the individual is "present" to himself, whereas society is 
"appresented" to individuals. For Husser!, each subject has no other direct 
experience than that of a single consciousness, his own; he directly perceives 
the bodily aspects of others and, by virtue of the similarity of these aspects and 
certain manifestations of his own body, he associates with the other. an organic. 
psychological, and rational life similar to his own. The consciousness of the 
other, or the other as a conscious being, is not given directly, but through an 
"oblique" experience, through an "appresentation. "50 If we grant this 
conception, it necessarily follows that society, in the same way as culture in all 
its forms, cannot be entirely grasped by a direct experience, but only by an 
experience where "appresentations" predominate. 
* 
* 
* 
The theory of the experience of the other is among the most problematic 
aspects of Husserlian phenomenology. Without recourse to reasoning by 
analogy, it takes this experience to be, however, the result of an "analogical 
transfer" [analogisierende Ubertragung] of the subject's own consciousness, 
239 
and does not seem to require in the least, any but the most rudimentary form 
of reflection. Now, the existence of this transfer, of this sort of projection, and 
of this reflection, in the matter of the fundamental, and primary experience of 
the other, is highly suspect. It is the e:xperience of the consciousness of the 
other which is more direct than the consciousness of the self. 
As a consequence, the only truly essential difference which Husserl 
maintained between the notion of individuality and that of collectivity is 
effaced, and one has left, on both sides, only more or less systematic sets of 
conscious phenomena, intrinsically bound to each other: the individual, like 
the collectivity, is "legion." 
It is evident that the individual grouping serves as the model of the social 
grouping. H usserl did not definitely free himself of individualism, failing to 
give a clear conception of the individual in relation to society. 
We must also assert that he did not avoid a restoration of organicism. The 
clearest manifestation of this deviation may be recognized in the metaphysical 
extensions which he believed were proper to furnish to his phenomenology. 
The world is ultimately presented as an immense society, the members of 
which occupy places, and exercise functions of different, and hierarchically 
ordered types, in the same way as there are many types of cells and functions in 
an organism. The universe's evolutionary path has, for a model, the 
development of the human being, from the embryo to the highest 
manifestations of reason: phylogenesis repeats ontogenesis. It is not by 
accident that H usserl saw in the community of philosophers and scientists a 
sort of "functional brain" of society and of Western Culture.51 As in Plato, 
from whom he takes the formulation, society is "man writ large. "52 
For the profound analyses of Husserl to bearfruit, we must rid them of their 
"egocentrism," take up the study of th(: experience of the other, and arrive at a 
notion less deliquescent to individuality. 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
aM uch of the material referred to in this article may be found in E. Husserl, Zur 
Phiinomen%gie der lntersubjektivitiit, H usserliana, Vols. XII, XIV, XV, ed., 
I. Kern (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973) which had not been published 
when this article appeared. 
NOTES TO THE TEXT 
I. This situation will change, perhaps, when the important group of documents is 
transcribed - more than a-thousand pages in shorthand - relating to this theme, 
and conserved at Louvain. 
2. Cf. especially the paragraph: "Die Person in Personenverband," Ideen II, pp. 
190-200. 
