First Study 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS
1 
The human sciences form an epistemic nexus that strives to attain 
objectively engaged and objectively valid conceptual cognition2 of 
the interconnectedness of lived experiences in the human-histori-
cal-social world. The history of the human sciences shows a con-
stant struggle with the difficulties encountered here. Gradually and 
within certain limits, these difficulties are overcome; research ap-
proaches, though only from afar, this goal, which incessantly beck-
ons every true scientist. The investigation of the possibility of such 
objective conceptual cognition forms the foundation of the human 
sciences. In the following, I present some contributions to such a 
foundation. 
The human-historical world as it confronts us in the human sci-
ences is not a copy, as it were, of a reality existing outside it. The 
cognitive process3 cannot produce such a copy. It is and remains 
bound to its means of intuiting, of understanding, and of concep-
tual thinking. Nor do the human sciences want to produce such a 
copy. Rather, they refer what happens and what has happened-
the unique, the contingent, the momentary- to a system of value 
and meaning. As it progresses, conceptual cognition
4 seeks to pen-
etrate this system ever more deeply. It becomes ever more objective 
in its grasp, without ever being able to surpass its own essence, 
namely, it can experience what is only through re-feeling and re-
construing, through connecting and separating, through abstract 
' Pagination in the margins refers to Gesammelte Schriften (hereafter GS), vol. 
VII. 
2 Dilthey speaks here of a "gegenstandliche und objektive Erkenntnis," recalling 
Goethe's account of his own "gegenstandliches Denken," according to which 
thought is "objectively active" and "does not separate itself from objects." See J. 
W. Goethe, Schriften zur Wissenschaftslehre, in Samtliche Werke, vol. r6 (Zurich: 
Artemis-Verlag-AG, 1977), p. 879f. 
3 Erkennen. 
4 "Conceptual cognition" is the translation of Erkenntnis in this edition. It desig-
nates the theoretical consciousness necessary for science and is to be distinguished 
from knowledge (Wissen), which may also be directly acquired from life or from 
reflection on life. See the introduction to this volume. 
3 
24 
STUDIES 
systems and a nexus of concepts. And it will become evident how 
even the historical narrative of what once happened can approach 
an objective grasp of its object, within the limits of the means of 
its understanding and of its conceptual grasp, only on the basis of 
the analytic sciences of the particular purposive systems. 
Such conceptual cognition of the processes themselves in which 
the human sciences develop is at the same time the condition for 
the understanding of their history. On that basis, one recognizes 
4 
the relation of the particular human sciences to the coexistence 
and sequence of lived experiences upon which they are founded. 
They cooperate to make the system of value and meaning that 
underlies this coexistence and sequence of lived experiences under-
standable in its totality, and then to make the singular intelligible 
on its basis. And at the same time one understands, on the basis of 
these theoretical foundations, how the outlook and the horizon of 
a period are always the presupposition for the fact that this period 
views the historical world in a definite manner. The possible his-
torical perspectives are traversed, as it were, in the epochs of the 
human sciences. And one last point becomes intelligible. The de-
velopment of the human sciences must be accompanied by a logical-
epistemological self-reflection, that is, by the philosophical con-
sciousness of the way in which the intuitive-conceptual system of 
the human-socio-historical world is formed on the basis of the 
lived experience of what has happened. It is hoped that the follow-
ing discussions will prove useful for the understanding of these 
and other procedures in the history of the human sciences. 
I. TAsK, METHOD, AND OuTLINE oF THE FouNDATION 
I. The Task 
Obviously, no other procedure is possible for the foundation of 
the human sciences than the one that applies to the foundation of 
knowledge5 as such. If there were a theory of knowledge that had 
achieved universal recognition, then it would just be a matter of 
5 "Knowledge" is the translation of Wissen in this edition. It is to be distin-
guished from both the cognitive process (Erkennen) and its specific outcome, 
namely, conceptual cognition (Erkenntnis). Knowledge can already be had at the 
prescientific level of elementary understanding, and when it is claimed at the higher 
levels of science and philosophy, knowledge encompasses what is valued and willed 
as well as what is conceptually cognized. See next page. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
applying it to the human sciences. But such a theory is one of the 
youngest of scientific disciplines. Kant was the first to conceive the 
problem in its general character; Fichte's attempt to unite Kant's 
solutions in a complete theory was premature, and today efforts in 
this domain are just as irreconcilably opposed to one another as 
those in metaphysics. Thus our only recourse is to select from the 
entire scope of philosophical foundations a set of propositions 
that satisfies the task of grounding the human sciences. No at-
tempt can escape the danger of one-sidedness at this stage of the 
development of the theory of knowledge. Nevertheless, the more 
universally the task of this theory is conceived and the more com-
pletely all means for its solution are considered, the less the pro-
cedure will be exposed to that danger. 
And that is just what is demanded by the peculiar nature of the 
human sciences. Their foundation must refer to all classes of know!-
5 
edge. It must extend to the conceptual cognition of reality, to the 
positing of values, and to the determination of purposes and the 
establishment of rules. The particular human sciences are com-
posed of knowledge about facts, about valid universal truths, about 
values, purposes, and rules. And human-socio-historical life itself 
constantly proceeds from the apprehension of reality to determi-
nations of value and from these to the setting of purposes and the 
establishment of rules. 
Whenever history presents a historical course of events, there 
occurs a selection from what has been handed down in the sources, 
and that selection is always determined by an assessment of the 
value of the facts. 
This relation is even clearer in those sciences that have the par-
ticular systems of culture for their object. The life of society differ-
entiates itself into purposive systems, and a purposive system is 
always realized in actions that are bound by rules. And these sys-
tematic human sciences are not only theories in which goods, pur-
poses, and rules appear as facts of social reality. Rather, just as the 
theory arose from reflection and doubt about the attributes of this 
reality, about the value of life, about the highest good, about tradi-
tional rights and duties, so it is also the point of transition toward 
the goal of gaining determinations of purposes and norms for the 
regulation of life. Political economy has its logical foundation in 
the theory of value. Jurisprudence must press forward from partic-
ular positive legal maxims to the universal legal rules and legal 
concepts that are implicitly contained in them; finally, it will con-
front those problems that concern the relations in this domain be-
26 
STUDIES 
tween evaluation, rule-giving, and the conceptual cogmtton of 
what is the case. Is the exclusive legitimation of legal order to be 
sought in the coercive power of the state? And if universal princi-
ples are to have a place in law, are they grounded in a binding rule 
immanent to the will or in evaluation or in reason? And these 
same questions return in the domain of morals; in fact, the con-
cept of an unconditionally valid binding of the will, which we call 
an ought, forms, properly speaking, the chief question of this science. 
Thus the foundation of the human sciences requires the same 
6 
extension to all classes of knowledge as is demanded in the general 
foundation of philosophy. For the latter must extend to every do-
main in which consciousness has shaken off the rule of authority 
and strives to attain valid knowledge through the standpoint of 
reflection and doubt. First, a philosophical foundation must justify 
knowledge in the domain of objective apprehension. Our naive 
consciousness of an objective reality and its attributes is over-
turned when .scientific knowledge seeks to derive from what is 
given in the senses an objective order according to laws. Finally, 
the problem arises of furnishing the proof of the objective neces-
sity of the procedures and results of the conceptual cognition of 
reality. But our knowledge of values also requires such a founda-
tion. For the values of life that arise in feeling are subjected to 
scientific reflection, and from this too there arises the task of pro-
ducing an objectively necessary knowledge. The ideal of its com-
pletion would be reached if the theory assigned a ranking to the 
values of life according to a fixed measure- the old, much dis-
cussed question that first appeared as the question of the highest 
good. Finally, such a philosophical foundation is no less necessary 
for the domain of setting purposes and establishing rules than for 
the other two domains. For even the purposes that the will sets for 
itself and the rules to which it finds itself bound, as they first de-
rive from the tradition of ethics, of religion, and of positive law, 
are undermined by reflection; and the human spirit must produce 
valid knowledge on its own here too. Everywhere, life leads to 
reflection about what is posited in it, reflection leads to doubt, and 
only if life is able to assert itself in the face of such doubt can 
thought end up with valid knowledge. 
This is the basis for the influence of thought in all attitudes of 
life. Although resisted again and again by lively feeling and genial 
intuition, the influence of thought prevails; for it springs from the 
inner necessity to establish, amid the inconstant variation of sense 
perceptions, desires, and feelings, something stable that makes 
possible a constant and unitary direction of life. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
27 
This work is accomplished in all forms of scientific thought. But 
it is finally the function of philosophy to complete these scientific 
reflections concerning life by gathering, generalizing, and ground-
ing them. Thus thought receives a definite function in relation to 
life. In its tranquil flow, life constantly produces all sorts of real-
ities. Many of its remnants are deposited on the banks of our little 
7 
ego. The same process allows us to enjoy all sorts of values in the 
life of our feelings or drives- sensuous, religious, and artistic life-
values. And amidst the changing relations between needs and the 
means of their satisfaction there emerges the process of setting 
purposes. Purposive systems are formed that pervade the whole of 
society and embrace and determine every member of it: Laws, or-
dinances, and religious precepts act as coercive forces and deter-
mine the individual. Again and again, it is the business of thought 
to apprehend the relations in and among these realities of life as 
they exist in consciousness and to progress from the singular, con-
tingent, discovered facts thus brought to clear, distinct conscious-
ness to the necessary and universal nexus contained in them. Thought 
can only intensify the energy of our becoming conscious of the 
realities of life. It is bound by an inner necessity to the experienced 
and the given. And philosophy is merely the highest endeavor to 
make conscious: it is the consciousness of every mode of con-
sciousness and the knowledge of all knowledge. Thus it finally 
takes as its problem the way thought is constrained by forms and 
rules as well as the inner necessity that binds thought to the given. 
That is the final and highest stage of philosophical self-reflection. 
If one conceives the problem of knowledge to have this scope, 
then its solution in a theory of knowledge can be designated as 
philosophical self-reflection. And at first, that will be the exclusive 
task of the grounding part of philosophy; the encyclopedia of the 
sciences and the theory of world-views grow from this foundation, 
and the work of philosophical self-reflection is completed in them. 
2. The Task of the Theory of Knowledge 
Accordingly, philosophy accomplishes its task first as a founding 
discipline or as a theory of knowledge. Its givens are all the thought 
processes that are determined by the purpose of producing valid 
knowledge. Its task lies finally in answering the question whether 
and to what extent knowledge is possible. 
If I consider what is meant by knowledge, it should be distin-
guished from a mere representation, presumption, question, or 
STUDIES 
assumption by the fact that a content appears here with a sense 
of objective necessity, which is the most universal character of 
knowledge. 
s 
This concept of objective necessity contains two moments, and 
these are the points of departure for the theory of knowledge. One 
lies in the evidence that adheres to properly completed thought 
processes, and the other is contained in the character of the reflex-
ive awareness6 of reality in a lived experience or in the character of 
givenness that binds us to an outer perception. 
3· The Foundational Method Used Here 
The method for accomplishing this task consists in the regress 
from the purposive system that is directed toward the production 
of objectively necessary knowledge in its various domains to the 
conditions upon which the attainment of this goal depends. 
Such an analysis of the purposive system in which knowledge is 
to be brought forth is different from what is accomplished in psy-
chology. The psychologist investigates the psychic nexus on the 
basis of which judgments are passed, realities are asserted, and 
truths of universal validity are expressed. He wants to establish 
the nature of this nexus. The origin of error has, ofcourse, just as 
good a place in the course of his analysis of thought processes as 
its elimination. For the process of knowledge could neither be de-
scribed nor explained as to its origin without those intermediaries 
of error and of its elimination. Thus in a certain respect, his point 
of view is the same as that of the natural scientist. Both want 
merely to see what is and have nothing to do with what ought to 
be. Nevertheless, there is an essential difference between the natu-
ral scientist and the psychologist, and it is conditioned by the 
properties of what is given to them. The psychic structural nexus 
has a subjective immanent teleological character. By that I under-
stand that a striving toward goals is inherent in the structural 
nexus. This concept of structural nexus shall be examined thor-
oughly. With it nothing is said yet about objective purposiveness. 
The subjective immanent teleological character of psychic pro-
cesses is foreign to outer nature as such. Immanent objective tele-
6 "Reflexive awareness" is the translation of Innewerden or Innesein in this edi-
tion. Reflexive awareness in its most basic sense is an immediate prereflective mode 
of self-givenness in which the dichotomies of form and content, subject and object, 
characteristic of reflective consciousness do not yet exist. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
ology is projected into the organic world, as physical, only as a 
way of interpreting on the basis of our psychic experience. By con-
trast, a subjective immanent teleology is given in psychic attitudes 
and in their structural relations within the psychic nexus. It is con-
tained in the nexus of psychic processes. Within objective appre-
hension as the basic psychic attitude, this character of psychic life, 
9 
according to which a striving toward goals is inherent in its struc-
ture/ makes itself felt in both main forms of apprehension, 
namely, of lived experiences and of external objects, as well as in 
the sequence of forms of representation. For the forms of re-pre-
sentation are connected as stages in a purposive system by the fact 
that in them something objective comes to ever more complete, 
more conscious, re-presentation, which corresponds increasingly 
to the demands of objective apprehension, and which makes it 
ever more possible to properly locate the particular object in the 
total nexus that is given as primary. Every lived experience in-
volved in objective apprehension already contains a tendency, 
grounded in the total nexus of psychic life, toward grasping the 
world. Thus a principle of selection, according to which represen-
tations are to be preferred or rejected, is already given in psychic 
life. It considers whether representations fit into the tendency to 
grasp the object in its connectedness with the world as it is primar-
ily given in the sensory horizon of apprehension. Therefore, a tele-
ological nexus is already grounded in psychic structure, one that is 
directed toward grasping what is objective. And this nexus is then 
raised to clear consciousness in the theory of knowledge. But the 
theory of knowledge is not satisfied with that alone. It also asks 
whether the attitudes inherent in consciousness actually reach 
their goal. Its criteria for that are the first principles that abstractly 
express the attitude to which thought is bound if it is in fact to 
realize its goal. 
4· Point of Departure for a Description of the 
Processes in which Knowledge Originates 
It turns out that the task of a theory of the sciences can only be 
accomplished on the basis of an intuition of the psychological 
7 See my Ideas for a Descriptive and Analytic Psychology (hereafter Ideas), GS V, 
207f. (D), Selected Works (hereafter SW), vol. 2. 
30 
STUDIES 
nexus in which the functions to which the production of knowl-
edge is bound cooperate empirically. 
Accordingly, the following relationship between psychological 
description and theory of knowledge arises. The abstractions of a 
theory of knowledge refer back to the lived experiences in which 
knowledge develops in a twofold form and through various stages. 
They presuppose insight into the processes whereby, on the basis 
of perceptions, names are given, concepts and judgments are formed, 
10 
and whereby thought progresses gradually from what is particular, 
contingent, subjective, relative, and therefore permeated with er-
rors, to what is objectively valid. Thus it is to be established in 
each single case what kind of lived experience takes place and is 
conceptually designated when we speak of the process of percep-
tion, of something objective, of naming and the meaning of verbal 
signs, of a judgment and its evidence, and of a scientific system. In 
this sense, I have emphasized in the first part of the Introduction 
to the Human Sciences~ and in the Ideas for a Descriptive and 
Analytic Psychology
9 that the theory of knowledge requires a ref-
erence to the lived experiences of the cognitive process in which 
knowledge originates, 
10 and that these preliminary psychological 
concepts need merely describe and analyze what is contained in 
the experienced· cognitive processes. 
11 Thus such a descriptive-
analytic account of the processes within which knowledge arises 
seemed to me to comprise a first task as a precondition for the 
theory of knowledge. 
12 The excellent investigations of Husser!, 
which have created a "strictly descriptive foundation" of the the-
ory of knowledge as a "phenomenology of the cognitive process," 
and thus a new philosophical discipline, proceed from similar 
points of view. 
I have further claimed that the demand for strict validity in the 
theory of knowledge is not invalidated by its reference to such 
descriptions and analyses. Indeed, the description only expresses 
what is contained in the process of producing knowledge. Just as 
the theory that is abstracted from these lived experiences and their 
relationships to one another cannot be understood at all without 
this reference, and just as the question concerning the possibility 
of knowledge also presupposes the resolution of the other ques-
s See Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), sw I, sof. 
• Ideas, GS V, 146 (D), SW 2. 
1
" Ideas, GS V, 147 (D), SW 2. 
"Ideas, GS V, 147 (D), SW 2. 
12 Ideas, GS V, 147 (D), SW 2. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
tion as to how perception, names, concepts, and judgments are 
related to the task of grasping an object, so it is the ideal of such a 
grounding description that it actually only express states of affairs 
and create fixed verbal designations for them. The approximation 
to this ideal is subject to the condition that only the facts and 
relations of facts contained in the developed psychic life of histori-
cal man, as the descriptive psychologist finds it in himself, is ap-
prehended and analyzed. It is also necessary to proceed ever fur-
ther in excluding concepts of psychic functions that are especially 
dangerous here. The work on this entire task has just begun. Ap-
proximation toward precise expressions for the states, processes, 
and connections under discussion can be attained only gradually. 
I I 
And thus it is already evident here that the task of a foundation of 
the human sciences cannot yet be resolved in a manner convincing 
for every co-worker. 
However, we can at least satisfy one condition for the resolution 
of the problem now. The description of the processes that produce 
knowledge is not least of all dependent on the ability to encom-
pass knowledge in all its domains. And this is also the condition 
on which the success of a theory of knowledge depends. Thus the 
ideal of the following attempt is a balanced look at the various 
systems of knowledge. But that is possible only by exploring the 
special structure of the great systems conditioned by the various 
attitudes of psychic life. A comparative procedure in the theory of 
knowledge can then be based thereon. This comparative proce-
dure makes it possible to carry out the analysis of logical forms 
and laws of thought to the point where the appearance of a subor-
dination of the matter of experience to the a priori of forms and 
laws of thought vanishes entirely. This happens according to the 
following method. The functions of thought that take place with-
out the use of signs referring to lived experience and intuition can 
be found in elementary operations such as comparing, combining, 
separating, relating; in terms of their cognitive value, they can be 
regarded as perceptions of a higher order. And the forms and laws 
of discursive thought can then be resolved in accordance with 
their legitimating grounds into ( r) the functions of the elementary 
operations, (2) the experienceable function of signs, and (3) the 
contents of such lived experiences as intuiting, feeling, and willing 
that serve to ground the apprehension of reality, valuation, deter-
mination of purposes, and the establishment of rules, both in terms 
of what they share and in terms of their formal and categorial 
peculiarities. In the domain of the human sciences, such a pro-
32 
STUDIES 
cedure can be coherently carried out, and thus the objective va-
lidity of knowledge in this domain can be grounded according to 
this method. 
This means that description must transcend the limits of those 
lived experiences that present themselves as engaged in objective 
apprehension. For if the following theory is to encompass the 
knowledge involved in the cognition of reality as well as the 
knowledge involved in evaluating, setting purposes, and establish-
ing rules, then it also requires a reference back to the nexus in 
which these various psychic functions are connected with one an-
other. Furthermore, in the conceptual cognition of reality there 
12 
arises a consciousness of norms governing the fulfillment of cogni-
tive ends. This normative consciousness is connected with the cog-
nitive processes in a distinctive structure. Moreover, we cannot 
banish from the givenness of outer objects a relation to the voli-
tional attitude; this is another reason why the abstract results of 
the theory of knowledge are dependent on the nexus of the whole 
of psychic life. The same result follows from the analysis of the 
processes by which we understand other individuals and their cre-
ations; these processes are fundamental to the human sciences, but 
they themselves are grounded in the totality of our psychic life. u 
From this point of view, I have emphasized again and again in 
earlier writings the necessity of apprehending abstract scientific 
thought as integrally related to the psychic totality.
14 
5. The Place of this Description in the System 
of the Foundation 
Such a description and analysis of the processes occurring in the 
purposive system of the production of valid knowledge moves en-
tirely within the presuppositions of empirical consciousness. In it 
the reality of external objects and other persons is presupposed, 
and that includes the presupposition that the empirical subject is 
determined by the milieu in which it lives, and in turn works back 
upon it. While the description presents and analyzes these rela-
tionshipS- as facts of consciousness contained in lived experiences, 
it of course asserts nothing about the reality of the external world 
11 See my treatise on hermeneutics in the essays dedicated to Sigwart, 1900 (D), 
sw 4, 2 35- 5s. 
14 Introduction to the Human Sciences, sw I, sof. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
33 
and of other persons or about the objectivity of the relations of 
acting and suffering. Only a theory derived from description ought 
to bring about a decision concerning the legitimacy of the presup-
positions contained in empirical consciousness. 
It is equally self-evident, then, that the lived experiences de-
scribed and the nexus they display can be considered here only 
from the point of view demanded by the theory of the sciences. 
The chief interest lies in the relations in which functions stand to 
one another, in the relations whereby these functions depend on 
the conditions of consciousness and on what is given, and finally 
in the relations whereby the particular processes that occur as part 
of the process of producing knowledge are conditioned by this 
nexus. For the subjective and immanent teleological character of 
the psychic nexus by virtue of which processes in it work together 
13 
toward achievements and thus create a striving toward goals is the 
basis for selecting from the course of thought what counts as valid 
knowledge about reality, about values, and about purposes. 
Let us summarize our conclusion concerning the role of descrip-
tion within the foundation. It grounds theory, and the latter refers 
back to it. Now, whether the description of the cognitive processes 
and the theory of knowledge are referred to one another in the 
particular parts of the theory, or whether the overall description 
precedes the theory, depends on its use. The theory itself receives 
both criteria to which its validity is bound from the description of 
knowledge. All knowledge stands under the norms of thought. At 
the same time, in accordance with these norms of thought, it refers 
to something experienced or a given; and the relation of knowl-
edge to the given is, more precisely, that of dependence on it. In 
accordance with the results of description, all knowledge stands 
under the highest rule of being grounded in something either expe-
rienced or given perceptually in accordance with the norms of 
thought. Subsequently, these two main problems
15 of the founda-
tion of the human sciences can be separated. The present studies 
concerning the foundation of the human sciences will interrelate 
them in a theory of knowledge, because both are decisive for ground-
ing the possibility of objective conceptual cognition. The more 
precise determination of these two problems can be arrived at only 
on the basis of description. 
11 Dilthey means the problems of being bound by the given and by the norms of 
thought. 
34 
STUDIES 
II. DESCRIPTIVE PRELIMINARY CONCEPTS 16 
I. Psychic Structure 
The empirical course of psychic life consists of processes; for each 
of our states has a beginning in time, changes with time, and will 
r4 
also disappear in it again. Further, this process of life constitutes a 
development; for the cooperation of the psychic stimuli is of such 
a character that it tends to give rise to an increasingly more deter-
minate psychic nexus as it accords with the conditions of life- to 
produce a gestalt17 of this nexus, as it were. And this acquired 
nexus is operative in every psychic process. It conditions when and 
how we are attentive; apperceptions are dependent on it, and the 
reproduction of representations is determined by it. The occur-
rence of feelings and desires and decisions of our will are also 
dependent upon this nexus. Psychological description has to do 
only with the factual content of these processes; physiological or 
psychological explanation of the origin or content of such an ac-
quired psychic nexus is beyond its scope.
18 
The particular, individually formed, psychic life in its develop-
ment constitutes the subject-matter of psychological research, but 
its first goal is to establish what is common in this psychic life of 
individuals. 
16 This descriptive part of the investigation is a further development of the stand-
point taken up in my previous works. Those works were aimed at grounding the 
possibility of an objective conceptual cognition of reality, and, as part of that, 
especially the objective apprehension of psychic reality based on a familiarity with 
it. In opposition to the idealistic theory of reason, I did not refer back to an a priori 
of theoretical understanding or of practical reason, which would be grounded in a 
pure ego, but rather to the structural relations contained in the psychic nexus that 
can be demonstrated. This structural nexus "forms the underlying basis of the 
cognitive process" (Ideas, GS V, rsr; SW 2). I found the first form of this structure 
in the "inner relation of the various aspects of an attitude" (ibid.). The second 
form of structure is the inner relation that links separate lived experiences within 
one attitude: thus, for instance, perceptions, memory images, and thought pro-
cesses bound to language (ibid.). The third form consists in the inner relation of 
kinds of attitude to one another in the psychic nexus (ibid.). As I now seek to 
further develop my foundation of a realistic or critical and objectively directed 
epistemology, I must point out once and for all how much I owe to the Logical 
Investigations of Husser! (1900, I90I), which are epoch-making in the utilization 
of description for epistemology. (D) 
17 Dilthey had already developed the idea of a gestalt of psychic life as the highest 
human achievement in Ideas, GS V, 220, SW 2. 
IS Ideas, GS v, rnff. (D), sw 2. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
35 
Here we emphasize a distinction. In psychic life, there are regu-
larities that determine the succession of processes. The distinction 
to be discussed here holds between these regularities. The first sort 
of relation between processes or moments of the same process is a 
characteristic moment of the lived experience itself: accordingly, 
impressions of belonging together and of liveliness in the psychic 
nexus are produced. The other regularities in the succession of 
psychic processes are not characterized by the experienceability of 
their mode of connection. The connecting moment cannot be dem-
onstrated in lived experience. A conditioning relation is inferred. 
Accordingly, our attitude is like that toward outer nature. Hence, 
these connections exhibit a rigidity and externality. Science estab-
lishes regularities of this latter sort by selecting particular pro-
cesses from the nexus of psychic processes and inductively in-
15 
ferring regularities about them. Association, reproduction, and 
apperception are such processes. The regularity established about 
them consists of uniformities that correspond to the laws of change 
in the sphere of outer nature. 
Furthermore, the various factors in a present state of conscious-
ness can condition the next state of consciousness even when they 
are layered upon one another without any inner connection, like 
strata in the psychic state of affairs (status conscientiae). An im-
pression that impinges upon a present psychic state from without, 
as something quite foreign to it, alters it. Contingency, being thrown 
together, being layered upon one another- such relationships con-
stantly make themselves felt in the state of consciousness of a 
given moment and in the emergence of psychic changes. And pro-
cesses such as reproduction and apperception can be conditioned 
by all these moments of the state of consciousness. 
A different sort of regularity is distinguished from these unifor-
mities. I designate it as psychic structure. By psychic structure I 
understand the pattern according to which psychic facts of various 
characters are regularly connected with one another by an inner, 
experienceable relation.
19 The relation can connect parts of one 
state of consciousness, or even lived experiences that are tempo-
rally separated from one another, or the attitudes contained in 
them. 20 Therefore, these regularities are different from the unifor-
mities that can be established as belonging to the changes in psy-
chic life. Uniformities are rules that can be exhibited as belonging 
" Ideas, GS V, 204 (D), SW 2. 
2'' Ideas, GS V, 204££., 207££. (D), SW 2. 
STUDIES 
to changes; thus every change is an instance that can be subordi-
nated to a uniformity. Structure, by contrast, is a pattern in which 
psychic facts are connected with one another by an inner relation; 
each of the facts thus related to one another is a part of the struc-
tural nexus. Thus the regularity here consists in the relation of 
parts to a whole. Before it was a matter of a genetic relationship in 
which psychic changes depend on one another; now, on the con-
trary, it is a matter of the inner relations that can be apprehended 
as belonging to developed psychic life. Structure is a complex of 
relationships in which, in the midst of the fluctuation of processes, 
in the midst of the contingency of the coexistence of psychic com-
ponent parts and of the succession of psychic experiences, particu-
lar parts of the psychic nexus refer to one another. 
16 
What is to be understood by these determinations will become 
clearer by indicating which psychic facts show such inner rela-
tions. The component parts of the sensory objective world that is 
represented in psychic life constantly change according to the in-
fluences of the external world, and the manifold given in an indi-
vidual's psychic life is dependent upon them. The resulting exter-
nal relations include coincidence, separability, difference, similarity, 
equality, whole, and part. By contrast, in psychic experience an 
inner relation emerges by which this content is related to objective 
apprehension, to feeling, or to a striving. It is obvious that the 
inner relation is different in each of those instances. The relation 
of a perception to an object, sorrow about an event, striving for a 
good- these lived experiences contain inner relations clearly dif-
ferent from one another. Each kind of relation also establishes 
within its domain regular relations between temporally separated 
lived experiences. And finally there exist regular relations between 
the kinds of relations themselves- together they comprise a psy-
chic nexus. I call these "inner relations" because they are grounded 
in a psychic attitude as such; mode of relation and mode of atti-
tude correspond to each other. One such inner relation is the way 
in which an attitude is related to a given content in objective ap-
prehension. Another is the way in which, when we set a purpose, 
an attitude is related to a given content as the representation of 
the object of the intended purpose. And inner relations between 
lived experiences within an attitude can be the relation of repre-
sented to representing or of grounding to grounded in objective 
apprehension, or of end and means, of decision and obligation in 
the volitional attitude. This fact of inner relation, like that of the 
unity of a manifold to which it is subordinate, is an exclusive char-
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
37 
acteristic of psychic life. It can only be experienced and displayed, 
but not defined. 
The theory of structure has to do with these inner relations. 
And only with them; not at all, on the other hand, with the at-
tempts to classify psychic life according to functions or powers or 
faculties. It neither claims nor disputes that there are such. Nor 
does it prejudge the question whether psychic life develops from 
something more simple to the complexity of structural relations in 
human nature generally or in the individual. Such problems lie 
completely outside its domain. 
Psychic processes are connected by these relations to the struc-
17 
tural nexus, and this structural character of the psychic nexus has 
the consequence, as will be shown, that lived experiences work 
together to achieve a total effect. It is not purposiveness in the 
objective sense, but a purposive efficacy directed toward certain 
states of consciousness, that belongs to the structural nexus. 
These are the concepts that determine in a preliminary way 
what is to be understood by psychic structure. 
The theory of structure seems to me to be a main part of de-
scriptive psychology. It could be developed as a distinctive, com-
prehensive whole. Above all, it provides the foundation of the hu-
man sciences. The inner relations that can be shown to pervade 
this whole are first those that constitute lived experiences, then 
those that hold between the components of a series of lived experi-
ences within an attitude and that ultimately comprise the struc-
tural nexus of psychic life. Furthermore, there is the relation in 
which specific functions cooperate to form a subjective teleological 
nexus and, finally, the relation between real things, values, and 
purposes as well as that between structure and development. All 
these relations are fundamental for the formation of the human 
sciences. They are equally fundamental for the concept of the hu-
man sciences and for their delimitation from the sciences of na-
ture. For the theory of structure itself shows that the human sci-
ences deal with a form of givenness that does not occur at all in 
the natural sciences. The component parts of the sensory objective 
world, when apprehended in relation to the psychic nexus, belong 
to the study of psychic life; on the other hand, sensory contents 
through reference to outer objects constitute the physical world. 
These contents do not belong to the physical world, which, rather, 
is the object to which we refer the sensory contents in the appre-
hending attitude. Our intuitions and concepts of the physical world 
express the state of affairs that is given in these contents only qua 
STUDIES 
characteristics of objects. The natural sciences are not concerned 
with the attitude of objective apprehension from which they origi-
nate. The inner relations in which the contents can stand in psy-
chic experience- act, attitude, structural nexus- are exclusively 
objects of the human sciences. These relations belong to their do-
main. And this structure, as well as the way in which the psychic 
nexus is experienced in us and understood in others, is sufficient 
to ground the special nature of the logical procedures of the hu-
I8 
man sciences. The matter will rest there: The object and the man-
ner of givenness determine the logical procedure. 
What means do we have, then, to arrive at an unobjectionable 
apprehension of the structural relations? 
2. The Apprehension of Psychic Structure 
Our knowledge of the structural nexus displays certain peculiar-
ities. A knowledge of the regular inner relations to be discussed 
confronts us everywhere in language, in the understanding of other 
persons, in literature, in the expressions of poets and historians. 
Phrases such as "I am worried about something," "I have a desire 
to do something," "I wish for the occurrence of an event," and 
hundreds of similar ones contain such inner relations. In such 
phrases I express an inner state without reflecting on it. It is al-
ways an inner relation that is expressed in them. In the same way, 
I also understand immediately what occurs in someone who ad-
dresses such phrases to me. And the verses of poets, the narratives 
of historians from the earliest accessible times, before all psycho-
logical reflection, are filled with the same expressions. I ask, then, 
what grounds such knowledge? What is objective, insofar as it 
consists of sensory contents, and relations between them of simul-
taneity, succession, or of a logical nature, cannot be the grounds 
for knowledge of this sort. After all, it must somehow be grounded 
in a lived experience that includes an attitude such as joy about 
something, longing for something. Knowledge is already there; it 
is linked to the lived experience without reflection; and no other 
origin and ground can be found than precisely in the lived experi-
ence. And here it is a matter of going back from the expressions to 
the lived experience, and not of interpreting something into them. 
The necessity of the relation between a determinate lived experi-
ence and the corresponding expression of the psychic is imme-
diately experienced. Structural psychology has the difficult task of 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
39 
forming judgments that reproduce with a consciousness of ade-
quation the lived experience of structures that [in turn] encompass 
more determinate lived experiences. The forms of expression of 
psychic life that have been developed and refined for a thousand 
years serve as an indispensable foundation; structural psychology 
has to develop these forms of expression further and grasp them 
more generally, while testing their adequation to the lived experi-
ences themselves. If we contemplate for a moment the utterances 
of social intercourse and of literature in their entire scope and 
think of an art of interpretation directed toward them, then it be-
r9 
comes clear at once that this hermeneutics of all existing human 
intercourse is based precisely on the permanent structural relations 
that emerge regularly in all spiritual manifestations of life.
21 
But just as surely as the knowledge of these structural relations 
refers back to our lived experience- and also makes our inter-
pretation of all spiritual processes possible- just as difficult is it to 
establish the connection between this knowledge and experienc-
ing. For lived experience remains present to inner observation only 
under very restricted conditions. We bring lived experience to a 
distinct, diagnostic consciousness in very different ways: some-
times in terms of one essential trait, sometimes in terms of an-
other. We distinguish between memories. By means of comparison 
we lift regular inner relations into prominence. We explore things 
imaginatively as a kind of psychic experiment. The direct expres-
sions of lived experience found by great poets and religious thinkers 
(the virtuosos of expression) can exhaust the entire content of 
lived experience. How meager and paltry our psychological ac-
quaintance with feelings would be without the great poets who 
have expressed the entire manifold of feelings and have made con-
spicuous, often in a surprising way, the structural relations in the 
universe of feelings. Here again, it is entirely irrelevant for such 
description to relate a volume of poetry by Goethe to him as a 
person: the description deals solely with the lived experience and 
not at all with any person in whom it occurs. 
If these problems are to be pursued further, then the psycholo-
gist has to be concerned with the careful distinction between what 
experiencing, introspection, and reflection respectively allow us to 
understand about lived experiences, and what is given of the struc-
tural nexus in these various ways. What needs to be said further 
21 See the "Rise of Hermeneutics," GS V, 317 (D), SW 4, 235. 
STUDIES 
for the foundation of knowledge can be clarified only by a discus-
sion of the particular attitudes. 
3. Structural Units 
Every lived experience contains a content. By content we here un-
derstand not all the parts contained in an encompassing whole 
that could be separated from this whole in thought. So under-
stood, the content would be the sum total of what can be differen-
2o 
tiated from what is contained in the lived experience as if it were 
an enclosing container. Rather, only a part of what is distinguish-
able in a lived experience is here designated as content. 
There are lived experiences in which nothing is noticeable but a 
psychic state. In physical feelings of pain, the localized burning or 
stinging can be distinguished from the feeling, but in the lived ex-
perience itself, they are indistinguishable. Therefore, there is no 
inner relation between them; and a conception of the lived experi-
ence that would apprehend the feeling here as a displeasure about 
the gnawing or piercing does violence to the facts. In the same 
way, in the life of the drives, there appear states in which no defi-
nite object-representation is combined with the striving; here too 
nothing of an inner relation between act and object is contained in 
the state of affairs. Thus one must not exclude the possibility of 
lived experiences that do not contain a relation of a sense content 
to an act in which it is there for us, or to an object, or a relation of 
a feeling or a striving to this object.22 Now, one may account for 
this in various ways. One may say that these lived experiences 
form the lower limit of our psychic life and that upon their basis 
other lived experiences of perceiving or feeling or striving come 
about that contain, as distinguishable moments, an attitude and a 
content to which that attitude is related. The extensive existence 
of inner relations between act- this word taken in the broader 
sense- and content in lived experiences suffices to establish the 
structural unit in lived experiences that forms our object here. And 
it cannot be doubted that such relations are pervasive. Thus the 
11 What is said here is intended to set aside the extremely difficult questions that 
arise when the indicated facts are classified under the concept of attitude; for the 
concept of structure developed here is independent of the answers to these ques-
tions. Especially for the foundation of an epistemology, it seems to be of no conse-
quence whether a more detailed descriptive psychological investigation rejects such 
a classification, or, if it accepts it, how it then accounts for the state of affairs. (D) 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
41 
object of outer perception is related to the sense content in which 
it is given to me. That about which I feel displeasure is related to 
the feeling of displeasure itself. The object-representation involved 
in setting a purpose is related to the volitional attitude that strives 
toward the realization of the object-image. What we call the con-
tent of a lived experience can be a visual image, a harmony, or a 
noise, and distinguished from this content and related to it is the 
attitude that presumes, asserts, feels, wishes, or wills this content. 
I imagine, judge, fear, hate, desire. These are attitudes, and there is 
21 
always something to which they are related, just as every some-
thing, every determination of content, in these lived experiences is 
there only for an attitude. 
"I observe a color," "I make a judgment about it," "It delights 
me," "I desire its presence": with these expressions I designate 
different attitudes that refer to the same content in a lived experi-
ence. Similarly, the same attitude of judgment, e.g., relating to the 
color, can also be referred to other objects. Thus the attitudes do 
not determine the presence of the contents, nor the contents the 
occurrence of attitudes. Therefore, we are justified in distinguish-
ing these two constituents of lived experiences from one another. 
And at the same time, we find them linked as a structural unit in 
lived experience. For there exists a relation between act and con-
tent that is grounded in the attitude. We call it an inner relation 
because it is experienceable and grounded in a general and regular 
feature of the attitude. 
Thus lived experiences show themselves to be structural units, 
and from them the structure of psychic life is formed. 
But there is another important reference point to be found in 
lived experience. Just as the content refers to objects, so it seems 
necessary that it refer, on the other side, to an I that manifests the 
attitude. However, this second reference point is by no means reg-
ularly contained in lived experience. The more the turn toward the 
object predominates in apprehension or striving, the less an I that 
apprehends or even one that strives is noticeable in lived experi-
ence. When Hamlet suffers on the stage, the spectator's own ego is 
effaced. In striving to complete a task, I literally forget myself. To 
be sure, this relation is always present in the feeling of life in 
which a situation relative to the surrounding world is felt in plea-
sure or displeasure, in hate or love. And the more decisively a 
willing sets itself against the world in determining its own pur-
poses, the more strongly is its being restricted felt, and the more 
decisively there emerges the relation of the attitude involved in 
STUDIES 
willing both to objects and to that which has the attitude, that 
which does the wishing, the desiring or willing. The addition of 
the representation of an ego to these processes can be given var-
ious psychological interpretations. However, if one passes from 
lived experience to the standpoint of reflection, then the relation 
of the attitude to that which has the attitude is unavoidable. And 
that is just what is demanded in the standpoint of reflection by the 
use of the concept of relation. If a kind of relation is contained in 
an attitude, then reflection requires that we add in thought an ego 
22 
that stands in a determinate relation to multiple contents or in 
multiple relations to a determinate content. 
From the standpoint of the objectification of lived experience 
and of reflection upon it, the new lived experience is placed in 
relation to my familiarity with a psychic nexus, to which, among 
other lived experiences, this present one also belongs. The inner 
structural articulation that then comes about for reflection is that 
of the psychic nexus, of the way the new lived experience belongs 
to this nexus, and finally of an attitude that relates this psychic 
nexus to an objective world, in this and in every other lived expe-
rience. If I call this nexus my ego or my subject, then it stands in 
determinate relations to the world of objects: I see objects, suffer 
from them, or want to have them. This mode of expression is 
correct for objective thought even in those cases in which nothing 
about an ego shows itself in a particular lived experience. 
4- The Structural Nexus 
We shall now look at the relations that hold between the struc-
tural units apprehended in lived experiences. In certain lived expe-
riences, we find an inner relation between act and content. This 
relation is characterized by an attitude toward content. The atti-
tude here is not related to the content in a merely temporal or 
logical relation. Neither is it the case that, as it were, various 
layers of mental facts run side by side as contents and attitudes, 
nor that we are speaking only of a logical relation that originates 
in reflection upon them both; rather, the inner relation that we 
have designated as a structural unit holds between them. The rela-
tion of separable parts in a whole that makes up this inner relation 
is sui generis: It occurs only in psychic life. And further, it is the 
simplest case of psychic structure.23 
23 Ideas, GS V, 204 (D), SW 2. 
THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURAL NEXUS 
43 
At the same time, all the lived experiences in which the same 
attitude toward contents is found are not only akin to one another 
in that respect but also give rise to such relations between contents 
as are grounded in the nature of that kind of attitude. 
Finally, the kinds of attitude themselves are linked to one an-
other by inner relations and thus comprise a complex whole. That 
is the origin of the concept of a structural psychic nexus. 
A further remarkable characteristic of structure appears here. It 
also can interweave perception, feeling, volition into systems by 
connecting several inner relations into the whole of a process or of 
23 
a state. Thus in a scientist, the cognitive process is a purposive 
system: Here the relation that we call volition is combined with 
the one that we designate as objective apprehension into the struc-
tural unity of one process; and in this whole purposive system, 
particular functions cooperate to bring about states that somehow 
have the character of value or purpose in consciousness. 
This structure of the psychic nexus displays apparent similarities 
to biological structure. But if one pursues these similarities, one 
arrives merely at vague analogies. Rather, the truth is that pre-
cisely in these properties of psychic life, according to which it is a 
structural nexus, rests the difference between what is given to us 
in lived experience and in reflection upon it, on the one hand, and 
physical objects that we construe on the basis of given sense com-
plexes, on the other hand. 
5. The Kinds of Structural Relation 
The manifold of what is given as content is boundless. The entire 
objective world to which we are related in our attitudes is com-
posed from such content. And what we designate as attitudes to-
ward these contents present themselves also at first as indefinite in 
number. Asking, believing, presuming, claiming, taking pleasure 
in, approving, liking and its opposite, wishing, desiring, and will-
ing are such modifications of the psychic attitude. Their differ-
ences cannot be derived from the variation in the content toward 
which an attitude is related; for the same attitude can persist in 
spite of change of content. 
There are kinships among the modes of attitude. But when one 
compares these modes, one arrives at a relation such as that be-
tween objective apprehension and feeling: These two are akin only 
insofar as each is an attitude. It also becomes apparent that in the 
case of alteration of outer conditions, one mode of attitude passes 
44 
STUDIES 
over into another. If the conditions upon which the realization of a 
desire depends are abolished, then the desire can pass over into a 
wish. And if the relation of a sense complex to an object has shown 
itself to be erroneous, then the assertion concerning the object 
turns into a doubt or a question. 
A principle that brings order into this multiplicity of attitudes 
can only be attained by distinguishing the kinds of inner or struc-
tural relation that are found in them. Accordingly, we must apply 
this principle to the given psychic states of affairs. 
Second Study 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
I. OBJECTIVE APPREHENSION 
Three kinds of inner structural relations can be distinguished in 
the psychic nexus and are related to one another in it. Each kind 
forms a system in which lived experiences are connected into a 
whole by a mode of structural relation. And each has a function in 
the psychic nexus. Here I will attempt merely to delimit these 
modes of structural relation from one another and to describe the 
one that is at work in the process of cognition. A more precise 
analysis of feeling and of willing becomes important only when 
it is a matter of grounding the human sciences upon descriptive 
psychology. 
r. Delimitation of Objective Apprehension 
Representations, judgments, feelings, desires, acts of will are al-
ways interwoven in the psychic nexus: this is the empirical given 
of psychic life. A harmonious combination of sounds evokes a 
feeling of pleasure; then a visual perception crowds in upon this 
calm aesthetic enjoyment and reproduces memories that give rise 
to a desire; this is in turn suppressed on the basis of a judgment 
because of fear of the consequences of satisfying the desire. Thus 
the empirical constituents of psychic life display the interweaving 
of processes belonging to all classes of psychic attitudes. And the 
uniformities that we establish in this genetic system of psychic 
processes refer to the cooperation of these manifold factors inter-
woven with one another in the psychic nexus. Thus the reproduc-
tion of our representations is conditioned just as much by the in-
terest and attentiveness with which impressions are appropriated 
and their representations reproduced as they are by the composi-
tion of these representations and the number of their repetitions. 
Various kinds of inner relation permeate this manifold web of 
various factors in the genetic system of the processes of psychic 
2 5 
STUDIES 
life. And each kind has the characteristic that the lived experiences 
belonging to it are connected with one another into a system by 
this inner relation. The relations within such a system form a main 
part of the permanent basic structures- the anatomy, as it were-
of the developed psychic nexus, according to its permanent uni-
form existence. One of these inner relations holds between the 
perceptions, remembered representations, judgments, and combi-
nations of judgments that constitute the systematic nexus of knowl-
edge. Whatever else may be contained in these lived experiences, 
each of them shows a determinate mode of consciousness of some-
thing having content, which we designate as being objective. The 
uniformity of the structural unity of the relations constituted by 
these attitudes can be said to characterize an objective system. 
Goethe expressed the ideal of this objective attitude and how its 
basic relations are directed toward an objective apprehension of 
the world with what could be called a high degree of transcenden-
tal awareness. The fact that not just a content is contained in lived 
experience, but also a mode of being conscious of it, is shown by 
the modifications that distinguish the various lived experiences of 
objects from one another. We find such modifications in the given-
ness that characterizes perception, in the supposition of a state of 
affairs involved in the imaginative representation of the painter or 
the poet, or the positing of reality in a judgment. No matter how 
many differences from a psychological point of view there may be 
between an imaginative representation and a perception of the 
same object-for instance, with regard to the contents-from a 
structural point of view, there is no difference in mode of con-
sciousness as it relates to the objective system. Objects can be 
what is given to the senses, but they can also be our lived experi-
ences, or partial contents of what is thus given, or similarities, or 
relations. Indeed, the world is only the sum total or the ordering 
of what is apprehended as being objective. And it is to this objec-
tive system that our feelings as well as our volitions then refer. The 
mode of consciousness in which something objective is there we 
designate as objective apprehension. 
2. The Relation between Lived Experience 
and Psychic Object 
All knowledge of psychic objects is founded on lived experience. 
Lived experience is first of all the structural unity of attitudes and 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
47 
contents. My perceptual attitude with its relation to an object is 
just as much a lived experience as my feeling about something or 
26 
my willing something. Lived experience is always certain of itself. 
And since lived experience constitutes the justifying ground for 
the entire system of my knowledge about psychic objects, I must 
analyze lived experience with regard to the certainty contained in 
it. Contents like a red or blue and attitudes like apprehending the 
red or being pleased by it are there for me. This being-there-for-
me can be designated as being-conscious, 1 or as lived experience, 
if this word is taken as referring less to the life-process itself than 
to the way it is there. What is there for me can be a sense quality 
appearing in a representation as well as a feeling of pain, or 
a striving. It can also be a mathematical relation just as well as 
my consciousness of a contractual obligation. The expression 
"being-there-for-me" is already a reflection about the existing 
state of affairs, since it is defined as belonging to an I. Indeed, the 
relation of a lived experience to an I to which it belongs can be 
something of which I am conscious as a state of affairs, just as 
much as the relation of a sense complex to an outer object. What 
we are here discussing is not some content or other of lived expe-
riences but what is common to them all, namely, that they are 
conscious and there for me. Every lived experience has this char-
acteristic. The existence of an object may be asserted in the lived 
experience of a content. Yet at the same time, something com-
mon to every lived experience is also contained in it, [namely,] 
that this assertion about the object and about the determinations 
of its content is conscious, and is there and present as conscious. 
The noise that a feverish patient relates to an object behind his 
back forms a lived experience that is real in all its parts. Both the 
occurrence of the noise and its being related to the object are 
real. And the fact that the assumption of an object situated be-
hind the bed is false does not affect the reality of this fact of 
consciOusness. 
This universal condition, which holds for everything that is 
there for me- consciousness or lived experience- must be con-
tained in the kinds of attitude found in me; otherwise, they would 
not be there for me. But this consciousness is distinct from the 
attitude. Sorrow about something is experienced or there for me 
as an attitude. Likewise a desire for something. No matter how 
this is accounted for psychologically, the certainty of lived experi-
' Bewu(St-Sein. 
STUDIES 
ence reqmres no further mediation. It can accordingly be called 
immediate. 
Every assertion about what is experienced is objectively true if it 
is brought to adequation with the lived experience. For it does not 
explicate the relation of the perceptual experience to objects by a 
material determination of the objectivity of the latter; rather, it 
27 
asserts only the occurrence of the perceptual attitude itself. And 
this state of affairs in consciousness is given to me as a reality. 
Thus the question whether a state of affairs in consciousness 
exists cannot even arise here. A feeling exists insofar as it is felt, 
and it exists just as it is felt: The consciousness of it and its con-
stitution, its being-given and its reality, are not different from 
one another. "Being-there-for-us," "being-given-to-us," or "fact-
of-consciousness" are only different expressions for the same state 
of affairs, in which apprehension and the fact given in it are one 
instead of some object standing over against it. If I designate this 
as reflexive awareness (Innewerden), then this expression must be 
understood in such a way that the relations of sense-contents to an 
object are just as much there for me in such reflexive awareness as 
a feeling or a striving. The German expression Innewerden is inad-
equate insofar as it suggests that reflexive awareness involves be-
coming (-werden) aware. Instead, reflexive awareness is more a 
matter of "being aware" (Inne-Sein). No assumption whatsoever 
has been made about any act whereby reflexive awareness be-
comes possible. 
The problems raised by Kant in his theory of inner sense have 
no bearing at all on this reality of a fact of consciousness as such. 
It concerns the question whether what is thus given can be appre-
hended as a product and analyzed into factors. Our life consists of 
processes emerging for consciousness in time; and whatever might 
be behind them is not something experienceable and consequently 
not required for the foundation of sciences that have as their sub-
ject matter lived experiences possessing the character of processes 
or events. The question whether we have sense-contents in con-
sciousness only in relation to an outer object and, consequently, 
whether sense-contents are there for us only in that relation has no 
bearing on the question of the reality of sense-contents. For if 
sense-contents possess reality together with this fact of conscious-
ness, then they have it precisely as parts of this fact of conscious-
ness, quite apart from any consideration of this relation to an 
outer object. If the lived experience is real as a fact of conscious-
ness, then so is every part that is contained in it. And each repre-
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
49 
sentation denotes something real insofar as it is correctly fulfilled. 
Here the reality of the particular lived experience is raised to ob-
jectively valid knowledge in psychological concepts, judgments, 
and contexts. 
In its historical development, the formation of concepts refer-
ring to lived experience is at the same time founded on under-
standing, which is in turn grounded in lived experience. Here we 
must disregard this complication in order to clarify the relation of 
lived experience to the apprehension of the psychic nexus. In lived 
experience, reflexive awareness and the content of which I am 
aware are one. 
What happens if I pay attention to this lived experience and ask 
28 
myself what it contains? Here is a second important problem for 
the foundation of the human sciences. I lie awake at night, for 
being conscious of my age, I worry about the possibility of finish-
ing the works that I have begun. This worry causes me much suf-
fering. Here is a structural nexus of consciousness for which ob-
jective apprehension forms the basis and in which an inner relation 
of feelings refers to the apprehended state of affairs as worry about 
it and as suffering from it: it is there for me as a complex of facts 
of my consciousness. Here reflexive awareness and what I am 
aware of are one. But I can also pay attention to this state of 
affairs. Then I shift to inner observation, whether it be of the lived 
experience or of its remembered content. As a result, a fact of 
consciousness becomes an object for me. But what I notice and use 
to clarify the object in terms of its content is contained in the lived 
experience itself or represented by it as remembered. To that ex-
tent, the object is immanent in the lived experience. On the other 
hand, a separation of the lived experience from the object occurs: 
The object comes to partially transcend it. And the decisive point 
is that this partial transcendence is grounded in the lived experi-
ence itself as well as in the relation of apprehension to it. By at-
tending to the object, I bring the structural relations that are con-
tained in the state of feeling to distinct consciousness. By means of 
elementary logical operations, I lift them into prominence, isolate 
them, and identify the structural relations found in the present 
lived experiences with those found in previous ones. As I continue 
to lie awake, I can discriminate individual characteristics of the 
lived experience as separate moments, to which others can then be 
related. And while I am thus distinguishing relations that are im-
manent in the lived experience, my apprehension of the lived expe-
rience itself is pulled along on the basis of the structure contained 
so 
STUDIES 
in it to lived experiences structurally connected with it, to those 
that ground it. The representation of my manuscripts is the appre-
hended basis of my lived experience, and I focus on it attentively. I 
separate from my [sorrowful] feeling about this object the feeling 
of tiredness as underlying it and the resulting feeling of worry 
about finishing these manuscripts. By distinguishing in this way, I 
bring to consciousness the structural relations of these component 
parts. And precisely in virtue of the structural nature of this expe-
riential unit, the apprehension of it requires moving on to struc-
turally related prior lived experiences. I am tired from overwork-
ing; having reviewed my files, I worry about their unfinished contents, 
whose completion demands incalculably more work from me. All 
this "about " "of " and "toward " all these references of what is 
' 
' 
' 
remembered to what is experienced, in short, all these structural 
inner relations, must be apprehended by me, since I now want to 
apprehend the fullness of the lived experience exhaustively. And 
precisely in order to exhaust it, I must regress further in the. struc-
tural network to the memories of other lived experiences. 
For the consciousness that lives in the present experience, the 
remembered experience is transcendent. It is something that lies 
beyond it. It is not posited as transcendent to consciousness as 
such, but as transcendent to the present moment of this conscious-
ness filled by lived experience. I designate this a transcendence for 
the experiencing consciousness. Thus the flow of time and the 
memory that comprehends it is the objective ground for the ap-
pearance of the consciousness of transcendence from the perspec-
tive of lived experience. And at the same time, I am sure of the 
objective reality of this transcendent something because of the 
structural relation in which the memory is related to the lived ex-
perience. The regress from the lived experience through the struc-
tural relations contained in it to the psychic nexus shows me as its 
condition a tendency to capture the unfathomable scope of lived 
experience and thus to attain a congruence between the lived ex-
perience itself and assertions about it. This psychological fact can-
not be explained further. The psychic energy generating the acts 
necessary for attaining congruence is such that the regular course 
whereby an essential structural [analysis] of what is given in lived 
experiences demands a regress to ever new constituent parts can 
release a feeling of contentment whenever and so far as this de-
mand is satisfied. No other kind of value is contained in this pro-
cess than that which is connected with the satisfaction of the act 
that captures the lived experience exhaustively. There is no voli-
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
51 
tion here, but rather a being-pulled-along by the state of affairs 
itself to ever more constituent parts of the nexus and the satisfac-
tion that lies in dealing with it exhaustively. 
The completion of lived experience in the direction of the psy-
chic nexus is grounded in a lawful progression that always goes 
beyond the apprehended content of the lived experience. This 
progression is conditioned by the state of affairs, and every step in 
it involves a satisfaction repeatedly instigated by the dissatisfac-
tion stemming from the inexhaustibility of the lived experience. 
Later it will be shown that a necessary progression of acts toward 
a transcendent object also occurs on the basis of what is given in 
outer perception. 
The intuition of the psychic nexus derives from the process [of 
30 
completing lived experience). When this nexus becomes the object 
of apprehension, lived experience is referred to it as a part of it. 
For this gathering consciousness, lived experience is now a part 
among other parts that form a continuum. But the special nature 
of this psychic object is not exhausted by the relation of the partic-
ular lived experience as a part to the psychic nexus as a whole. It 
is the nature of structure, of the structural unity of lived experi-
ence grounded in a determinate attitude, of the structural relations 
of lived experiences to one another, finally of the structural rela-
tions of the attitudes to one another, that is fundamental in the 
formation of the intuition of the psychic nexus. For when we ask 
what is meant when we speak of it, then, in contrast to a simple 
sum or an aggregate of parts that comprise a whole, it is a unity of 
psychic life constituted by relations that overlap and connect all 
constituent parts. Just as in the concept of the subject or the ego it 
is the attitude to what is objective that constitutes it, so it is the 
structural relations within and among acts of lived experience that 
constitute this concept. The psychic nexus is partially transcendent 
insofar as a lived experience is always contained in it as a part, 
and it is transcendent in this partial way only for the experiencing 
consciOusness. 
Only by means of an abstraction have we separated up until 
now the apprehension of lived experience as it occurs by means of 
elementary logical operations from discursive acts of thought. For 
the acts that strive to attain an exhaustive account of lived experi-
ence and that lead to the constitution of the psychic nexus as an 
object also involve the use of signs, the formation of concepts and 
judgments. The stability of the object is attained only in its being 
posited by a judgment. Accordingly, the other side of the process 
STUDIES 
in which the psychic nexus is grasped as an object is the pro-
gression toward apprehensions of the lived experience that bring 
what is contained in it to more adequate, more stable, and more 
fundamental expression. And that is also the basis of the double 
relationship of the adequate representation of lived experiences 
and of the transcendence that originates in apprehension. The 
judgment intends the lived experience. It is a re-presentative com-
plex, conditioned by the nature of the signs, that refers to the lived 
experience. In it there are always contained moments that express 
essential determinations concerning the psychical. Even the simple 
assertion about a lived experience, that this suffering is unbear-
able, contains two such essential determinations that transcend the 
3 r 
particular lived experience and, as such, stand before me as inde-
pendent of this lived experience. What is meant in the judgment is 
accordingly a state of affairs transcending the lived experience and 
pointing to a psychic nexus by way of essential determinations or 
relations of essential determinations. And these essential deter-
minations cannot be related back to the lived experience by ade-
quation. They tend simply to exhaust them, to bring them to clear 
consciousness, to grasp them comprehensively. 
The object of this kind of apprehension grounded in lived expe-
riences is psychic life or the subject; it is brought to re-presentation 
by various approaches toward concept-formation. Each of these 
approaches is founded in the nature of this object and in the mode 
in which it is given. The demand inherent in consciousness for 
objectively valid knowledge and for unconditionally valuable pur-
poses led the Socratic school to stipulate that a rational subject 
dwelling in psychic life is alone capable of fulfilling this demand. 
That was the beginning of the development of transcendental psy-
chology. On the other hand, observers of humanity, poets, and 
historians have constructed a human essence from capacities such 
as wit, discernment, ambition, patriotism, egoism, and from vir-
tues and vices. They imagine them as working together in certain 
proportions. From this approach, which constructs the psychic ob-
ject from faculties, there also arises the theory of psychic functions 
when the teleological cooperation of these faculties directed at the 
overall function of psychic life comes to be apprehended as a fur-
ther fact about the psychic nexus. This psychological perspective 
was developed by the German psychological school and found its 
classical representatives in Tetens and Kant. From another per-
spective, if one develops the thought of a strictly causal connection 
of psychic processes, if psychic changes are made intelligible on 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
53 
the basis of uniformities concerning psychic events, then a differ-
ent order of psychological concepts emerges. Or as is being at-
tempted here, one can pursue the structural relations in which the 
lived experiences of the individual psychic life are linked by 
an immanent teleological system. And in addition to all these at-
tempts at a conceptual apprehension of the psychic nexus, reli-
gious reflection is constantly operative, a reflection that, though it 
uses conceptual re-presentations, always discerns something in 
psychic life by which it has a real relation to the divine. Inner 
experience, communion with God, conversion from self-centered-
ness are the constitutive experiences for this perspective on the 
3 2 
course of life and for this objectification of the inner world. Each 
of these objectifications of lived experience grasps an aspect of 
psychic reality. In fact, each of them has again and again enabled 
entire epochs to express experienced psychic reality in concepts 
and by means of these concepts to attain an appropriate influence 
upon this reality. 
Let us summarize the relation between experiencing and appre-
hending psychic objects. Attentiveness to a psychic fact, observa-
tion of it, apprehending this fact in the psychic nexus, judgments 
about what has been apprehended, and finally systematic unity 
of knowledge concerning psychic nexus- these various modes of 
apprehension all express reality to the extent that they can be 
brought to congruence with lived experiences. For we are always 
dealing here only with re-presentations of what is experienced. 
Likewise, the concept of the psychic nexus designates a reality in-
sofar as the re-presentations by which it is produced are contained 
indubitably in lived experience. Indeed, the apprehension that is 
founded on lived experience corresponds to the apprehension that 
is founded on sensory intuition in the fact that it also contains a 
relation to an object; but it differs from it by a moment that is 
determinative for the theory and method of knowledge in this re-
gion. Constituent parts, regularities, attitudes, and inner structural 
relations are contained in the lived experience itself. Apprehending 
the psychic nexus is just as much an infinite task as apprehending 
outer objects. But it consists only in extracting from the lived experi-
ences what is contained in them. Thus the reality of the psychic 
object is at the same time always possessed and always subject to 
efforts to explicate it conceptually. The process of apprehending 
always contains within itself both moments: the satisfaction in the 
convergence of the conceptual and the judgmental with lived experi-
ences, and the unease of not being able to deal exhaustively with the 
54 
STUDIES 
lived experience. Accordingly, mistakes in apprehending the psy-
chic are found above all in the illusion of being able to do justice 
to the entire content of lived experiences by a determinate mode of 
concept-formation. 
3. The Relation between Intuition and Sensory Objects 
The apprehension of outer objects has to be distinguished from 
this apprehension of the psychic nexus. As the latter is charac-
terized by its foundation in lived experience and by the properties 
33 
of what is experienceable, the former is characterized by its foun-
dation in sensory intuition and the basic properties thereof. To-be-
represented, in the sense that a content exists, is the way for it to 
be there for me inseparably from what is intuitable for the senses. 
Feelings or strivings are kinds of attitude that can also be re-pre-
sented as contents, but what is intuitable exists only as content. 
Apart from the boundless multiplicity of contents, what is intu-
itable for the senses also contains differences in the way the con-
tents are there for me. The free representation of a color or a 
sound, the appearance of indeterminate visual images before fall-
ing asleep, the fantasy image of vegetation larger and more bril-
liant in color than in reality, the perception of an object, and the 
memory image of it- all these are constituents of such a multi-
plicity. Two distinctions stand out prominently. What is intuitable 
to sense is either a free representation, as in a color, for instance, 
or it is something assumed in imagination as that wilderness of 
vegetation, or it is a given that is determined by the act of percep-
tion. On the other hand, what is intuitable is either in relation to 
an object, as, for instance, a particular perception of St. Stephen's 
Church; or it exists before me without any such relation of a con-
tent to an <object> distinct from it, as a represented color or a 
sound. 
Several relationships hold among these forms in the manifold of 
what is intuitable for the senses. These relations are important 
both for distinguishing the kinds of attitude and for the theory of 
knowledge; for they concern the structurally conditioned and tele-
ological relations grounded in the attitude of sensory apprehension. 
Within the just mentioned manifold of what is intuitable, the 
relation between an act, a sensory intuitive given, and an object 
constitutes a structural unity. This relation is shown most clearly if 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
55 
one starts with a sense-judgment. In it what is objective is deter-
mined by means of what is given to sensory intuition. Thus what 
is objective must in some way be predelineated in the perception 
in which it is given. And in fact it is. 
I start with the perception of any object, a tree, for instance. 
What is actually given <in sensuous intuition> 2 are the trunk, 
parts of branches, and leaves as seen from a definite standpoint. I 
supplement this particular image by re-presentations. This product 
of apprehension acquires its unity from the relation to the same 
34 
object. The most disparate modes of apprehension- intuition, lin-
guistic designation, representations with various degrees of liveli-
ness and fullness- are combined in a system of inner relations. We 
call the entirety of the system of these relations a total representa-
tion- using the word "representation" in the broadest sense. In 
this system, only a small part is given purely intuitively, as we saw. 
What is thus given we call a pure intuition. Here the object is itself 
given in sensory intuition. And this character of givenness belong-
ing to sense perception is not a content in addition to the other 
contents that comprise the perceived as sensorily intuited; rather, it 
designates the way in which intuitable contents are there for me in 
sense perception. As opposed to the pure character of univocally 
determined givenness that belongs to this pure intuition, there is 
latitude for a freer attitude when re-presentations are combined 
with it into a total representation. The character of the latter giv-
enness is clarified by reflection on the fact that the object recurs in 
different kinds of attitudes. Thus the existence of the perceptual 
object is connected by reflection to a lived experience deriving 
from the volitional attitude toward this object, namely, the experi-
ence of resistance, inability to alter it, pressure of the external 
world. For that which is perceived with the character of givenness 
resists; it cannot be altered; it exerts a pressure upon the subject. 
The character of objective necessity with which the content of per-
ception and of all its re-presentations is posited in the processes of 
objective apprehension originates in these relations between per-
ceptions. Thus the character of givenness that is proper to sense 
perception is the foundation for the necessity of every assertion 
about objects of sensory apprehension. If its character of givenness 
refers back to something that is not itself a perception, then this 
2 Dilthey's text supplemented in accordance with a suggestion of the German 
editor. See GS VII, 354· 
STUDIES 
relation is without any content; and the sphere of apprehension, 
which always requires a "what," a content, terminates in the im-
manent relations between constituent parts having determinate 
content. 
The remembered representation is to be distinguished from per-
ception. It is a re-presentation of what has been perceived. The 
copy receives the character of re-presentation because the object 
can be recognized in the memory image. Here a re-presentation 
based on reproducing or imaging actually occurs, and the entire 
concept of cognition as reproducing or imaging can be traced back 
to the relation of memory to perception. 
3 5 
An important feature of the system in which the parts of the 
structural nexus of objective apprehension are related to one an-
other is the distinction of the particular perception from the object 
and its relation to it. The particular perception is related to the 
object by means of a total representation. Here also we are dealing 
not with a genetic psychological relationship but with one that is 
foundational. Neither the real perception nor the progression that 
relates the perception to an object separated from it are part of 
experience. However, the logical relation of compulsion exerted by 
the state of affairs is clear. What falls within experience can serve 
merely to illustrate this compulsion. An object emerges at the hori-
zon of the ocean. As it comes closer, it gets larger. The color of the 
object changes when the sun bursts forth. I assume that a Pacific 
Islander who never saw a ship before can nevertheless hold these 
images together. They are different, but the continuity that con-
nects the moments of uninterrupted observation compels one to 
relate them to the same object. This process is only meant to illus-
trate how from the constraint of the concurring particular experi-
ences themselves the demand arises to add in thought something 
not given in any single experience. This total representation re-
presents a plurality of single perceptions, but it refers to only one 
object. It is intuitive and yet cannot be actually fulfilled in any 
intuition. It designates a task, and to fulfill it and to actually grasp 
the meant object, apprehension is driven forward to ever new acts 
of re-presentation. 
Thus in sensory apprehension, there is a relation to the object 
that is different from the apprehension of the psychic nexus in a 
way that is important for the theory of knowledge and for meth-
odology. The object transcends perception, every single perception 
is inadequate in relation to the object, and re-presentations are 
directed at approximating the object. 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
57 
4- The Structure of the Lived Experiences of Apprehension 
Thus three moments can be distinguished in the structure of the 
lived experience of apprehension in both domains. One of its 
properties is the relation to an object: in this respect, the same 
thing can be perceived, represented, imagined, assumed, or appre-
hended in a judgment. Each of the kinds of structural relation 
grounded in these various modes of apprehension can be directed 
toward the same object, or different objects can stand in the same 
36 
structural relation, whether of being perceived, thought, or willed. 
A way of relating to objects and the objects themselves can vary 
independently of one another. I can judge about all possible ob-
jects, and one and the same object can enter into the most various 
structural relations other than my judging attitude toward it. But 
finally, the content that is contained in the lived experience and 
comprises the material directed at the object is to be distinguished 
not only from the attitude but also from the objective direction 
itself. The content- for instance, a sensory complex of the sense 
impression of a house- first makes the relation to the particular 
object of a house possible. Different contents at different times of 
the day, in different weather, from different standpoints, are re-
ferred to the same object, namely, this definite house. On the other 
hand, the same content- for instance, a nocturnal impression of 
an indefinite sort- allows a variety of interpretations, i.e., it can 
be referred to various objects. 
5. Lived Experiences of Apprehension as Structural Unities 
and Their Inner Relations to One Another 
I 
All lived experiences that are characterized by the apprehension of 
objects contain inner relations to one another. These structural re-
lations permeate all the interweavings in which feelings or voli-
tional intentions are combined with the apprehension of objects. 
And no matter how much the lived experiences of apprehension 
differ from one another and how much they are modified by chang-
ing inner or outer circumstances, they can be connected with one 
another by relations common to the processes of apprehending 
objects. Together they form a distinctive type of nexus. Caught up 
in a cognitive train of thought, I am interrupted by some news, by 
37 
STUDIES 
the entrance of a person, or by physical discomfort. It can be a 
long time before the cognitive train of thought in which I had been 
caught up is continued by me; nevertheless, these cognitive experi-
ences so distant from each other are combined as parts in the 
whole of my cognitive nexus. These kinds of relations in the sys-
tem of objective apprehension have a tendency to extend to the 
whole of psychic life. 
2 
The relations of the lived experiences within objective apprehen-
sion hold among the contents that appear in these lived experi-
ences. They are contained in the state of affairs that is given objec-
tively. With the existence of two intensities, the degree of intensity 
is also given. In the actual connection of the quality of color with 
extension is contained the fact that color cannot be represented 
without extension. Of course, the apprehension of this state of 
affairs presupposes the acts of connecting and separating; how-
ever, the relations hold not between these acts but between the 
contents contained in the facts of the situation. The validity of the 
relations under discussion is independent of the acts of conscious-
ness in which they are apprehended. Likewise, the syllogism ex-
presses only logical relations that are grounded in objects, not re-
lations between acts of thought. In an argument, premises and 
conclusions are combined in a structure, the nature of which is the 
grounding of the conclusion by the premises. But in the syllogism, 
acts are not apprehended as foundational; rather, in it a state of 
affairs is apprehended. No consciousness of the operations of thought 
that we carry out accompanies objective apprehension. Only the 
contents and their relations are present to apprehension. The pro-
cedure that explicates the plurality of distinguishable elements in 
the content of objective apprehension by a multiplicity of acts that 
combine to produce the representation of a complex whole goes 
beyond the state of affairs that can be established descriptively: It 
attributes to the state of affairs, as conditions of consciousness, 
acts corresponding to the factual relations. "Act," then, designates 
the condition of consciousness for the knowledge of a factual rela-
tion. In objective apprehension, a demonstrable structural relation 
holds only between the attitude and the content that constitutes 
the material for the determination of the object. 
This structural relation then determines in a twofold direction 
the advance toward grasping what is objective, an advance in 
which more and more relations are established in what is experi-
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
59 
enced and intuited. In one direction, the advance in apprehending 
what is objective lies in the series of re-presentations that are to 
assimilate what is contained in lived experience and intuition. In 
the other direction, the lived experiences that grasp relations be-
tween the various objects become connected. 
Therefore, the relations between the lived experiences of appre-
hension hold first between lived experiences in which the same 
object is there for us in different modes. Intuition, memory, total 
3 8 
representation, naming, subordinating the particular under the 
universal, connecting parts into a whole, judgment- those are all 
modes of apprehension. Without any change in the object, the 
mode of consciousness in which it is there for us varies if one 
proceeds from intuition to memory or to judgment. Their com-
mon direction toward the same object connects them into a tele-
ological nexus. Only those lived experiences that perform a func-
tion in the direction of apprehending this determinate objective 
domain have a place in that nexus. This teleological character, 
which is defined by being directed toward apprehending some ob-
ject, is then further expressed in the fact that all relations between 
the modes of apprehending the same objective world have the 
characteristic that all modes of apprehension obtain the assurance 
of their truth value from identifying what is meant in them with 
what underlies them as intuited or experienced. The expression of 
this assurance is the consciousness of conviction. It is the reflexive 
awareness of the achieved congruence of the act of apprehension 
with what is experienced or intuited. Thus the judgment accords 
with the aim of grasping the object whenever it is accompanied by 
the consciousness that what is meant in it is the thing itself; and 
the consciousness of conviction that accompanies the true judg-
ment is the expression of the immediately or mediately produced 
congruence with the thing itself, which is given intuitively. And the 
progress from part to part within the present nexus is conditioned 
exclusively by this teleological character. As we saw, the moment 
that leads apprehension on toward more and more adequate forms 
lies in what is given in lived experience, in the material of percep-
tual intuition, and in their relation to the same object. Each of 
these forms, as related to the same object, must [also] be able to 
realize an identification with the intuitions or lived experiences 
that provide the material for the apprehension of this object. And 
as long as the lived experience still is not exhausted or as the ob-
ject given piecemeal and inadequately in single intuitions still has 
not come to adequate expression, there is always an inadequacy in 
what is meant and expressed that demands a more appropriate 
6o 
STUDIES 
expression. Thus we see a full array of relations between experi-
ences of apprehension that are grounded in the structure of lived 
experiences of apprehension and in the structural relations of the 
modes of expression that follow from their relation to the same 
object. 
39 
Let us attempt to clarify the formation in which the nexus that 
originates in this way is constituted. Perceptions about the same 
object are related to one another in a teleological nexus insofar as 
they advance toward the same object. When a perception relates 
to an object without including the backside or the inside, they are 
only co-intended. This perception then demands others that com-
plete the material [needed] for apprehending the object. Memory 
is already included in this process of completion. In the nexus of 
objective apprehension, memory has a steady relation to the intu-
itive foundation in that it has the function of being representative 
of it. Here the difference can be very clearly shown between the 
apprehension of the experience of remembering by studying its 
underlying process in accordance with its uniformities, and the 
consideration of memory with regard to its function in the nexus 
of apprehension, by which it becomes representative of what has 
been experienced or apprehended. Under the impression and the 
influence of an emotional state, memory can appropriate contents 
that are different from its foundation- this is precisely the basis 
for aesthetic imagery- but memory located in the presently dis-
cussed teleological nexus of grasping an object is directed toward 
identity with the intuited or experienced material of objective ap-
prehension. The fact that memory fulfills its function in objective 
apprehension is shown by the possibility of establishing its sim-
ilarity with the perceptual foundation of objective apprehension. 
Significative apprehension, which is formed on the basis of intu-
itive apprehension, is [also] grounded in lived experience or intu-
ition. There is a system of relations among expressions. By "ex-
pression" we understand "each instance or part of speech, as well 
as each sign that is essentially of the same sort. " 3 And these ex-
pressions differ from other kinds of signs by the fact that they 
mean something. 
If we seek a foothold in psychological description,4 the con-
crete phenomenon of the sense-informed expression breaks 
·' Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations, trans. J. N. Findlay (London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1970), I, p. 275· 
4 Here Dilthey substitutes "psychological description" for Husserl's "pure 
description." 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
61 
up, on the one hand, into the physical phenomenon forming 
the physical side of the expression, and, on the other hand, 
into the acts which give it the meaning and eventually the 
intuitive fullness in which its relation to an expressed object is 
constituted. 5 
Insofar as the expression refers in this way to something objective, 
it means something. Insofar as it establishes this relation for a 
present of presentified intuition or lived experience, the relation 
between name and named is realized in a "meaning-fulfillment." 6 
40 
The physical phenomenon of the expression and its relation to a 
meant object are not merely spatially or temporally coexistent, but 
form an inner unity. The relation is such that, while we experience 
the representation of a word, we are involved not in representing 
the word but exclusively in fulfilling its sense, its meaning. 7 Our 
interest belongs to the meant object. It proceeds from the intuitive 
representation of the word, according to its function, to the ob-
ject, and points to it. The lived experience of how a name not only 
means, but also refers to, an object, and that fully realizes this 
relation by a corresponding intuition, forms an inner unity that is 
characterized by the mode of relation found in the essence of mean-
ing. The fact that it is composed of partial acts and is founded in 
an intuition does not matter. It is a structural unity. 
The structural unity in the lived experience of judgment is even 
more complex. s And here we again come upon an already ob-
served relationship. The structural unity found in a lived experi-
ence, a unity that can be analyzed into several moments (partial 
acts), is always determined by a relation, to which the others are 
subordinated. In the lived experience of judgment, it is the relation 
of the meaningfully formed assertion to the objective domain about 
which something is expressed. 
Let us now consider that aspect of the judgment by which it 
combines words into a proposition. Here we meet a new struc-
tural relation in the sphere of apprehension: that which governs 
the connection of parts of speech in an assertion. This is a matter 
of solving the problem of pure grammar. 
The foundations of speech are not only to be found in physi-
ology, psychology and the history of culture, but also in the a 
priori. The latter deals with the essential meaning-forms and 
' Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 280. Translation modified. 
" Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 28 r. 
7 Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 282. 
" Marginal note: Ed. Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, II, 459· (H) 
STUDIES 
their a priori laws of compounding or modification, and no 
speech is conceivable that is not in part essentially determined 
by this a priori. 9 
The meaning of speech is limited by this lawfulness; its violation 
therefore yields nonsense. 
But if we say "a round or," "a man and is," etc., there exist 
no meanings which correspond to such verbal combinations 
as their expressed sense. 
10 
Here is an interesting example of the method of reading off inner 
relations from outer forms. An a priori lawfulness reigns in the 
region of meanings 
whereby all possible forms systematically depend on a small 
number of primitive forms fixed by laws of existence. This 
41 
last generalization, through its a priori purely categorial char-
acter, brings to scientific awareness a basic chapter in the con-
stitution of "theoretical reason." 
11 
But the progression from a lived experience or a particular intu-
ition to the universal is already given in this tendency of experi-
ences of apprehension to strive to grasp and express an object in 
ever more suitable forms, since the state of affairs can merely be 
clarified by means of names, concepts, judgments. Whether the 
end point of the path lies in establishing a fact or a regularity, the 
path to this end always goes through the universal. In both cases, 
the actual grasp of the object is only completed and the tendency 
to grasp objects is only fulfilled in the consciousness that one pos-
sesses the thing itself and possesses it fully. But if a progression to 
the universal is already contained in this tendency, it in turn re-
quires an advance from the relations that are found in particular 
objects to those that occur in larger objective systems. Thus one 
set of relations leads over into a second one. In the first set, the 
lived experiences aimed at apprehending the same object by differ-
ent forms of re-presentation, and ever more adequately, were re-
lated to one another. The second set connects those lived experi-
ences that grasp relations between changing objects, whether in 
the same form of apprehension or by connecting various forms of 
" Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 524· 
'" Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 5!7· 
" Husserl, Logical Investigations, I, 5 21 [translation modified to match Dilthey's 
quotation from the first edition]. An incomplete sentence follows. Marginal note: 
from here on, Husser! (ibid.) 649. Then a gap. (H) 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
63 
apprehension. Thus the more comprehensive relations contained 
in the objective state of affairs come about. They are especially 
clear in the homogeneous systems that delineate spatial, tonal, and 
numerical relations.
12 Every science relates to a delimitable objec-
tive domain in which it has its unity. And the systematic connect-
edness of the scientific domain gives knowledge claims their coher-
ence. The completion of all relations contained in what is experienced 
and intuited would be the concept of the world. With this comes 
the demand that everything experienceable and intuitable should 
be expressed in terms of the nexus of factual relations contained 
therein. And thus one can finally say that the structural relation 
involved in the determination of an object by experienced or given 
contents produces a system of objective relations and expresses 
itself in them, and that by this structural relation the lived experi-
ences of this class are related to one another ever more extensively 
and intimately. 
3 
As we summarize the already presented moments of objective ap-
prehension, we arrive at an understanding of what turns out to be 
the essence of conceptual cognition. To know what conceptual 
cognition is, one must ask what is to be understood by its constit-
uents: perceiving, verbal designations, judgments. The answer is, 
that which someone perceiving, representing, or judging means or 
intends when he performs these acts. The experiencer is certain of 
what he experiences. This mode of certainty refers back to nothing 
that might lie behind it; it rests in itself. If we then form the theo-
retical, ideal concept of a pure intuition, we also posit with the 
givenness a reality, which refers back to whatever fixes (forms) this 
givenness and makes possible its steadfastness and its imprint. 
This is to be accepted at first as a fact; but one must clarify it in 
order to do justice to the properties of the acts of cognition that 
are founded thereon. Every other act that is a component part of 
objective apprehension, as it develops on these foundations, desig-
nates, means, or signifies a reference back to lived experience or 
pure intuition. lt 11 designates, signifies, or means an object that is 
apprehended on the basis of what is contained in lived experience 
and intuition. In lived experience, the object is immanent; but in 
12 See my Ideas, GS V, 172. (D), SW 2.. 
11 Here, perhaps, to be added: on the other hand. (H) 
STUDIES 
the act of intuiting as it actually contributes to apprehension, the 
object is that to which the competing single intuitions refer. Acts 
of apprehension are first of all the elementary logical operations: 
equating, distinguishing, determining gradations, connecting, sep-
arating, discerning parts and wholes either as they occur together 
or as they can be combined, or as they are separable from a back-
ground, and finally, apprehending factual relationships. These ele-
mentary operations can be performed apart from any signification 
by words or other sorts of signs. They are perceptions of the sec-
ond degree and merely express a state of affairs. As part of intu-
ition, the elementary operations display the remarkable peculiarity 
of noticing states of affairs. 14 These states of affairs are not there 
for me as facts of consciousness; rather, they emerge as realities 
independent of consciousness. To that extent, they contain some-
thing independent of the change characteristic of the stream of 
consciousness, a distinctive sort of universality. As a tonal quality 
remains identical even though sounds pass over into one another, 
so also the distance between two sounds as such remains a fact 
that is always the same amid the psychic change of the musical 
experiences. These states of affairs are essential determinations, 
43 
and as such they are foundational for conceptual cognition insofar 
as it signifies more than something that emerges in or coexists 
with consciousness. 
The fact that, besides the sensory states of affairs, there is an 
analogue to value or purpose in the apprehension of what is expe-
rienced is suggested by the simple forms of assertion, that some-
thing is beautiful or good- not only for me, but in general- as 
something meant in the state of affairs, for which the reasons will 
have to be sought. 
4· THE TENDENCY TOWARD SYSTEMATIC CONNECTION 
INHERENT IN THE STRUCTURE OF APPREHENSION 
AND ITS COMPLETION IN SCIENCE 
Thus the demand to establish everywhere relations between all 
that can be experienced and what can be perceived is found in 
objective apprehension in accord with the nature of the facts them-
selves as offered by lived experience and intuition. And at the 
same time, there is in the structure of apprehension a unitary prin-
14 gewahren. 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
65 
ciple that produces this connection and contains in itself the war-
rant of its validity. 
There are several acts- the act of perceiving, the act of forming 
a representation of an object- in which single perceptual images 
are related to one another in a determining way so that a single 
object is materially determined by them, the acts of subordinating 
the particular under the universal, species under a genus, connect-
ing parts into a whole, signifying acts, and the various forms of 
judgment that arise on their foundation, combinations of judg-
ments leading up to the systematic nexus of a domain of concep-
tual cognition- all of which show a common trait: They all in-
volve the relation of being re-presented and re-presenting. Each 
member of the indicated nexus is re-presented by another, and that 
which follows in this nexus is a re-presentation of its preceding 
member. Thus an image
15 of an object re-presents the perceptual 
contents to which it refers. A general idea re-presents particular 
images. The connection of characteristics that defines a concept re-
presents the individual images that belong within the scope of the 
concept. And finally, the system of conceptual cognition that en-
compasses an objective domain re-presents the sum total of the 
perceptions referring to those objects. 
The psychology of this nexus of objective apprehension has this 
concept of re-presenting as its focal point, and its chief task is to 
clarify this concept. It is clear that quite different modifications of 
44 
the re-presentational attitude are included in this concept and that 
the discovery of these modifications is a task as difficult as it is 
complicated. For a single memory-image represents a perception 
in a different sense from that in which a judgment re-presents 
what has been intuited or experienced. 
A lived experience that stands in a re-presentational relation to 
one or more lived experiences that condition it is grounded in 
them. The genetic relation of lived experiences to one another is 
not meant, for here to-be-grounded does not mean to be condi-
tioned genetically. It designates rather that relation between a 
grounding act and a grounded act, according to which the former 
contains the legitimation for the latter. Here it becomes evident 
that the relation of grounding holds not between acts but between 
what is contained in the acts. 
1; Because Dilthey uses both Vorstellung and Reprasentation in this context, the 
former term that is normally translated as "representation" is here rendered as 
"image" and "idea." 
45 
66 
STUDIES 
Thus the relation between what grounds and what is grounded 
corresponds to that between what is re-presented and what does 
the re-presenting. The perceptual judgment ultimately has its foun-
dation or its legitimacy in one or more acts of perception that are 
re-presented by the judgment. The same relation thus runs through 
all the above-mentioned lived experiences, according to which 
some are re-presented in others and ground them. 
Thus each lived experience that is re-presentational contains a 
relation to lived experiences that are re-presented in it and ground it. 
Furthermore, all lived experiences that involve being-re-presented; 
grounding, re-presenting, or being-grounded are linked as part of 
one nexus by the homogeneity of attitude in these lived experi-
ences and by the relations posited in this attitude. It is the kind of 
attitude that determines the sort of nexus of lived experiences that 
is produced, and it also contains in itself the moment of their con-
nection into a whole. The enduring relations that are the basis for 
objective apprehension are contained in these relations. Here is the 
stable background on which the variable light of momentary con-
sciousness wanders back and forth. 
II. OBJECTIVE HAVING 
I. Feeling 
We now turn to a nexus that requires a preliminary survey of 
some determinate propositions about the structure of feeling and 
willing. For we are concerned only with preparing a comparative 
mode of consideration for a theory of knowledge. The point is to 
liberate logic as well as a well-rounded theory of knowledge from 
its predominant reference to the conceptual cognition of reality 
and to form logical, theoretical, and scientific propositions in such 
a way that they refer to the determination of value, the setting of 
purposes, and the establishment of rules, just as much as to the 
conceptual cognition of reality. Accordingly, the elementary opera-
tions that precede discursive thought are to be apprehended in 
their relation to discursive operations in all these different do-
mains. This comparative mode of consideration will then establish 
what conditions from the structural nexus of objective apprehen-
sion, of feeling and of willing, are determinative for the logical 
forms. 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
67 
Is the concept of structure applicable to the life of feeling? It is if 
the lived experiences of feeling are structural unities, if structural 
relations exist between these lived experiences of feeling, and if the 
totality of these relations fulfills a function that has a structural 
relationship to the functions of objective apprehension and willing 
in the subjective immanent teleology of the psychic nexus. On this 
basis, it will then be shown that the structural relationships of 
feeling constitute a domain delimitable from apprehension as well 
as from volition. And for logic and the theory of knowledge, this 
domain, with the determinations of value that occur within it, is 
to be exhibited accordingly as one of the three domains to which 
all universal logical, theoretical, and scientific statements must 
refer. 
I. DELIMITING LIVED EXPERIENCES OF FEELING 
First we must establish the common character of those lived expe-
riences that are always designated as feelings in linguistic usage. 
Whenever we pass from any of the forms of objective apprehen-
46 
sion to feeling, the first thing that asserts itself is that there is no 
comparison between them and feeling. Hearing, seeing, touching 
are comparable to one another; a judgment about a seen object is 
comparable with a perception. But when I set a feeling next to 
these modes of cognition, I no longer find any point of compari-
son. Therefore, descriptive psychology, which merely apprehends 
what there is in developed psychic life, finds in feelings a realm of 
psychic facts whose members, though they are everywhere inter-
woven with the facts of apprehension and volition, present them-
selves as incomparable with them. 
I can, of course, find points of comparison between sensory per-
ception, sensory feeling, and sensory desire; they lie in a common-
ality of the contents that can be discovered in the different atti-
tudes. But the attitudes themselves are not comparable. 
This experienced difference separates feeling from objective ap-
prehension as well as from willing. It presents itself to analysis 
first in the fact that in feeling, a contrast occurs that is usually 
designated as that between pleasure and displeasure. 
Feelings form a manifold that displays intensive and qualitative 
distinctions. They can be ordered in a sequence of intensities: On 
one side, degrees of intensity of pleasure, favor, and approval suc-
ceed one another in the positive direction; on the other side, the 
68 
STUDIES 
different degrees of displeasure, disfavor, and disapproval succeed 
one another in the negative direction. Pleasure and displeasure in 
the narrower sense, approval and disapproval, favor and disfavor 
are noted as qualitative distinctions in feelings. 
On the basis of this characteristic, let us now define the limits of 
feeling and thus set off in a preliminary way a domain of the life 
of feelings. Feelings are interwoven with intellectual and with voli-
tional experiences; and their presence in them is so extensive that 
one could speak of an omnipresence of feelings in psychic life. 
Attentiveness is accompanied by interest, which is, however, a 
function of a feeling originative from the situation and the rela-
tionship to an object. Likewise, manifestations of wit and acuity, 
surprising combinations, are accompanied by pleasurable feelings. 
And whenever a tension or an interruption occurs in the volitional 
attitude, these states of will elicit a felt attitude of displeasure. By 
contrast, success is accompanied by pleasure. 
47 
However, it is an equivocation to speak of a feeling of similarity, 
a feeling of reality. Here what influences the double use of the 
word "feeling" is the common character of reflexive awareness. 
Affirmation and denial, doubt and certainty, are neither pleasur-
able nor painful in themselves. There is a pure unmixed joy' 6 in 
the settling of all sorts of hypotheses. And also in the volitional 
sphere, the reflexive awareness and consciousness of the obliga-
tion of my will in reference to carrying out a deed by an act in 
which I have obligated myself is not as such connected with a 
feeling of pleasure or pain, although such a feeling of pain or of 
restriction can readily supervene from the context of life. Thus 
there is also a consciousness of a volitional attitude that, though 
it is very similar to a feeling and is even connected with feeling, is 
not itself a feeling. Generally speaking, there is a reflexive aware-
ness of one's own state that is very similar to a feeling and can be 
combined with feeling but should not itself be apprehended as a 
feeling. And because reflexive awareness is not sufficiently distin-
guished from feeling here, the expression "re-feeling" must be 
rejected as too narrow for those lived experiences in which an-
other's state, be it actual or fictitious, is understood. What is 
involved here is rather a re-experiencing in which the entire psy-
'" The original idea is not really developed here. It would have to be shown 
that certain logical operations do not produce any feeling of pleasure or displea-
sure. (H) 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
69 
chic nexus of another's existence is apprehended on the basis of a 
particular given. 
2. THE GENERAL NATURE OF THE ATTITUDE IN THE LIVED 
EXPERIENCE OF FEELING 
We must now demonstrate that the same attitude and the same 
structural properties can be found in all the lived experiences of 
the realm of feelings as we have delimited it. But once other lived 
experiences that are not characterized by pleasure or displeasure 
are also included, it becomes impossible to determine or define the 
structural unities, the structural relations, and the teleological 
function of this domain of feelings. 
The nature of structure in this domain is conditioned by a basic 
characteristic of the feeling attitude, a characteristic to which one 
can only allude, which can only be expressed metaphorically but 
cannot be defined. In objective apprehension, an orientation to-
ward the object is contained in the lived experience, and the differ-
ent lived experiences are related in being directed toward grasping 
the object. The lived experience of willing is headed toward a deci-
sion, toward the realization of a state of affairs, both in a specific 
lived experience and in the relation of lived experiences to one 
another. But what do we find in the lived experiences of feeling? 
Activity and direction are excluded from this domain. Whether we 
48 
feel our own state or some object, it involves only a state of being 
as a kind of attitude: a state of being that is either connected to 
the apprehension of given objects or grounded in the state of the 
subject. The way this state of being depends on outer objects or on 
the state of the subject is obscured through an inverse attitude that 
loses itself in the depth of the subject. The role that the apprehen-
sion of facts plays in any state of being gets lost in the distinctive 
way in which this role is submerged in a total state of being. Every 
state of feeling merely expresses the incomprehensible relation of 
this very depth of the subject to its states and to objects. In this 
way, then, one characteristic of the structure in the world of feel-
ing is given, which is entirely different from that in the other two 
spheres. This holds both for the structural unity of a lived experi-
ence of feeling and for the structural relations of lived experiences 
of feeling to one another. 
From this it follows that the moments that form the lived expe-
riences of this class are subordinated to the chief structural mo-
70 
STUDIES 
ment, which is experienced as feeling. One's state is experienced in 
feeling; objects are savored and thoroughly enjoyed in feeling. All 
lived experiences of feeling share this characteristic, and wherever 
they are dominant in a state of mind, 17 every life-relationship, every 
object, every other individual seems to be there in order to be 
thoroughly enjoyed, thoroughly suffered, and fully savored. To 
discover in our own lived experience the multiplicity of the world 
of feelings that arises in this way, we must turn to the poets, who 
teach us to find in ourselves what would otherwise perish un-
noticed in the urgency of life: all the ways in which we must learn 
to bear the joy and sorrow of the earth, to relax our usual con-
cerns with objective fixities, and to let nature speak to us. The 
structure of feeling lies in a regress from objects to attitude. When 
this regress also allows us to enjoy and suffer more delicate vibra-
tions, it is a mood. The subject can capture the stable relationships 
of objects and human beings to itself by means of representations 
of past lived experiences of feeling and thus, as it were, retain a 
system of its felt relations to things, individuals, communities, 
even humanity. To the extent that the subject lives neither in a 
theoretical nor a practical attitude, but in these stable relations, 
we call its life-constitution an emotional state of mind. It rests 
upon memory, which re-presents lived experiences of feeling and 
puts these re-presentations in ordered relations to things, persons, 
and communities. Thus we see an ordered sequence ranging from 
49 
emotional disposition concentrated by memory, constancy, and 
stability of felt life-relationships to the naive or even conscious 
and willed isolation of lived experiences of feeling in mere moods 
that express what is momentary. This is the life-constitution that 
wants to savor everything the world contains, everything for itself, 
everything at the moment. Given all this, it becomes evident that 
the structure of feeling makes possible a system of relations based 
on re-presentation, a system that aims at identical objects of multi-
ple lived experiences of feeling. Further, it follows from these rela-
tionships that feeling, when it is given as a lived experience, pre-
sents itself in a great multiplicity of qualities. These qualitative 
determinations are most intimately combined in experience itself 
with the states and the objects in connection with which they 
emerge. By contrast to both the explanations of genetic psychol-
ogy and the statements of an analytic procedure about what can 
be distinguished in feeling or separated by experiments, we pro-
17 das Gemut. 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
71 
pose here a mode of consideration that deals merely with the func-
tion of feelings in the psychic structural nexus. Accordingly, though 
feeling is not a system, its function is such that the universe can 
become the object of an all-encompassing sympathy. As harmonies 
and dissonances in the universe are enjoyed and suffered, the indi-
vidual relates to things, persons, and communities through feeling, 
and permanent objective relations come to exist between universal 
states of affairs and aesthetic or ethical feeling. Thus in valuations, 
a conceptual and adjudicative attitude is built upon feeling. And 
the influence of these valuations extends to the formation of world-
views as well as to the determination of values. 
Three forms of value emerge: (I) life-values, which are grounded 
in the feelings of one's own state, (2) efficacious values, which 
relate to the milieu that conditions one's state, and ( 3) intrinsic 
values of objects and persons, which express feelings toward ob-
jects in judgments and concepts. 
What is objective in values is the result of stable relations in the 
feeling of objects, [e.g.,] the principle of a state of affairs in moral-
ity; objective [representation] in aesthetics. 
3. THE STRUCTURAL UNITY OF THE LIVED 
EXPERIENCE OF FEELING 
Acts of objective apprehension form the foundation of feeling. Ev-
erything that belongs to this apprehension as an act can be such a 
foundation. And the relationship of subject and objective-world, 
which originates in these acts as the prevalent schema for appre-
hension, becomes the objective foundation of our feeling as well as 
so 
of our willing. The lived experience of feeling is a felt attitude 
about situations or objects objectively given or represented as pos-
sible or as imagined. 
Bodily feelings and moods that are unattached to objects form 
the lower limit of the structural unity of lived experiences of feel-
ing. Both are feelings, for they have the distinctive mark of the 
opposition of pleasure and pain. And just as they contain within 
themselves this opposition, they also gnaw at, pierce, or penetrate 
one's body in ways that are distinguishable from pleasure and dis-
pleasure. But they do not contain any noticeable attitude to this 
content. And we distinguish the localized sensations of feelings 
only if the latter stands at the center of attention. But physical 
pain can take place as if at a lower level of psychic life alongside 
another attitude; the dim awareness then attached to it is even 
72 
STUDIES 
compatible with an extraordinary intensity of pain. Thus often in 
the excitement of the will in battle, wounds are not noticed. Also, 
as a rule, moods without objects provide only the background for 
another attitude; the latter can be compared to lights and shadows 
cast by the sun hidden behind the clouds. 
Beyond this limit, the lived experience of feeling is a structural 
unity in which a state of feeling is structurally united by the nature 
of the attitude of feeling with the having or representing of a state 
of the subject or the perceiving or representing of an object. Here 
the object can be varied independently of the attitude of feeling. 
Moreover, this attitude can undergo multiple variations relative to 
the same object. 
When a listener apprehends a musical theme conceived in imag-
ination, when he follows it as it goes through different pitches, 
instruments, rhythms, and keys, and when he finds himself at the 
same time undergoing a corresponding change of feelings, then 
what is objectively apprehended or remembered is clearly distin-
guishable from the feeling. The change of tonal images does not 
coincide with the change of feelings; thus the variation in those 
images and the variation in feeling show themselves to be different 
from each other. The experienced difference becomes even clearer 
in reflection. In fact, the tonal images and the feelings are not 
stratified in consciousness like two different layers; rather- and 
this is what is decisive and characteristic- they exist in an inner 
relation to each other. And this relation is that of an attitude to-
ward tonal images. It is not a relationship of association that a 
51 
feeling might or might not have to a perceived or represented con-
tent. A pleasure exists only together with the content about which 
I am pleased. Language expresses this relationship: I am glad about 
something, or I am pleased at something, an event that concerns 
me makes me happy or pains me. Accordingly, an attitude is found 
here just as much as in a cognitive judgment about an object or in 
willing an object as a purpose. 
To be sure, attitude and object are independent variables of each 
other in feelings. But this means that they are ideally separable, 
not that they can really exist without each other. Differences can 
be shown only in the way in which they are connected. The way in 
which feelings are connected to states or objects produces distinc-
tive structural differences when we look inversely at the depths of 
subjectivity. 
The schema of the subject and the objective world arose from 
objective apprehension, and the fundamental distinction between 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
73 
feelings corresponds to it: feelings of one's states and of objects. 
Feelings of one's states have as their intuitive foundation the sub-
ject in its relationship to objects and persons. The latter are here 
only indirectly causes of feeling, insofar as they condition mod-
ifications of the subjective state of being. Thus the feeling associ-
ated with success is a joyous consciousness of power; the feelings 
associated with the pressure of circumstances and impotence over 
against the world are hatred, fear, or gratitude. Object-feelings, 
however, relate our own state to the apprehension of objects. Some 
object-feelings are elicited by sensory contents or their relations, 
by simple perceptions without reference to conceptual or sensory 
objects. Others originate in the interpretation of the sensory mani-
festations of living creatures- an interpretation accomplished in 
re-experiencing or understanding. Success in understanding is de-
pendent on the affinity of the psychic structural nexus. 1s 
This points to or indicates a lived experience or its equivalent. 
Re-experiencing is erroneously conceived as re-feeling; for the full 
vivacity and range of our attitudes comes into play in these pro-
cesses. The feelings that originate in the achieved apprehension of 
another's life- sympathetic joy, pity, contempt, reverence, admira-
tion- are to be distinguished from re-experiencing. They arise to 
the degree that the interpretation of the expressions of another 
living being proceeds beyond their momentarily manifested states-
for instance, in a cry or a gesture- to grasping the entire life of 
another. In this context, two kinds of lived experiences of feeling 
are often mixed; but they should be distinguished. Re-experienced 
52 
feelings of another subject that appear as a proper constituent of 
the process of understanding constitute one part of these lived ex-
periences. A feeling about the re-experienced feeling of the other 
person, such as pity or empathic joy, is a different constituent of 
the lived experience. We find them separated in the sphere that is 
most powerful in bringing about the interpretation of inwardness, 
namely, in the apprehension of instrumental music, where, con-
nected with the sensory effects of tone and tone-complexes in mel-
odies and their combinations in rhythms and harmony, the pro-
cesses in another subjectivity come to expression by interpretation. 
The feelings aroused by instrumental music produce a full range of 
moods, which accompanies what is objectively given to sense. No-
where does the role of feeling in re-experiencing stand out so inde-
pendently. But feelings about these feelings are ruled out by the 
tx See my Ideas, GS V, 198 (D), SW 2. 
74 
STUDIES 
fact that the musical sequence has been detached from the context 
of the course of reality. No one would pity Beethoven because of 
the expression of suffering in one of his adagios, and no one can 
rejoice sympathetically with the serene cheerfulness of an allegro 
by Haydn. 
The interpretation of nature has an affinity with the interpreta-
tion of objects consisting of tones. Empathy with nature involves a 
felt interpretation of it, which, on the basis of the mood of the 
observer, re-feels something kindred in it. And discovering some-
thing in nature by feeling involves a retroactive effect on our mood, 
based on the already performed interpretation of a natural phe-
nomenon, for instance, of the shining sea or the gloomy forest. 
Here too the object-feeling is not connected with any feeling about 
feelings. 
On the other hand, both kinds of feeling, those contained in re-
experiencing and those about another's feelings, are mixed in the 
readers of a novel or in the observers of a tragedy. They re-experi-
ence what happens to Mignon'
9 or to Julia/0 and feel pity for their 
sufferings. 
At first, a characteristic proportionality between subjectivity 
and objectivity manifests itself as a common fact within the world 
of feelings. Conditions that are located in the depths of the psychic 
nexus turn out to be operative here. Thus feeling is, as it were, the 
organ for the apprehension of our own individuality and that of 
others and, through empathy with nature, even for the apprehen-
sion of properties of nature that no knowledge can reach. Depths 
that are inaccessible to knowledge appear to reveal themselves in 
53 
feeling. This turn inwards occurs on the basis of objective appre-
hension. Apprehension determined the object from the perspective 
of feeling, pressing forward to reach it, as it were; in the midst of 
the interplay between ourselves and objects, feelings measure the 
productive force of the self, the pressure of the world, and the 
energy of the persons around us. 
Let us now focus on the nature of object-feelings. In a judgment 
about these feelings, what is objective can possess the attributes of 
19 Mignon, a character in Goethe's Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. Mignon is an 
orphaned acrobat without family or home. Wilhelm purchases her to rescue her 
from an abusive master and, in part, to try to fill the void he feels at the loss of his 
beloved Mariane. 
20 Julia, a character in Don Juan by George Gordon, Lord Byron. Julia enters 
into an adulterous affair with Don Juan, seven years younger than she, and is 
discovered by her husband. 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
75 
beauty, meaning, and value. In self-approval and in being pleased 
with ourselves, we enjoy characteristics of our person that give 
our own existence value, meaning, and beauty; and this is the ori-
gin of self-evaluation. A similar conversion of favor or of an ap-
proving judgment into objective characteristics can also be found 
in judgments concerning sensory objects or other persons: this 
rose is beautiful, Socrates' remaining in prison was good. Thus 
corresponding to the structural unity of object-feeling, there is a 
judgment with a validity claim based on the object. 
Feelings of one's states contain a different kind of structural re-
lation, which begins with what Hegel speaks of as "the oppres-
siveness of spirit closed in upon itself." Here spirit is its own mat-
ter and has in itself all the material of its knowledge. Similarly, 
RitschF
1 designates feeling as "the spiritual function in which the 
ego is at home with itself." And in the same sense, there is an 
opposition in the attitude of feeling that has from antiquity been 
referred back to that of either fostering or impeding life. 
Feelings of objects and of states demonstrate their specificity 
also in the fact that even where they enter into relations, they are 
separable from each other. 
4· STRUCTURAL RELATIONS BETWEEN FEELINGS 
We find specific feelings interwoven everywhere in the psychic 
nexus. They emerge in the context of objective thinking- as in 
uneasiness at its failure, as feelings of tension during mental work, 
or as satisfaction in the conceptual cognition achieved. They ac-
company the changes and the relations of our representations as 
well as the circumstances of our self. They permeate the texture of 
our entire volitional attitude, as in the disquiet of unsatisfied de-
sire, the joy of effectiveness, unpleasant tension in action, or satis-
faction at the change introduced in the world of objects or in our 
own circumstances. They exist in this context as determinatively 
54 
connected with another attitude. The feelings that appear in this 
way have no inner relation to one another. But even where the 
attitude proper to feelings determines the composition of the lived 
experience, the lived experiences of feeling seem to stand in no 
stable ordered relations to one another. No relationship like that 
of re-presentation or of means and end exist between the lived 
21 Albrecht Ritschl, r822-89, German theologian who emphasized the ethical-
social content of theology. 
STUDIES 
experiences of feeling. Like a light that flashes upon the waves and 
fades away, they appear only to disappear again. They are distinct 
from objective apprehension and the volitional attitude in that the 
lived experiences in those two spheres are related to one another 
in a regular order, whereas the relations of feelings to one another 
in the course of an emotional state or a passion appear to be irreg-
ular and contingent: a difference that, in any case, gives a special 
character to this sort of attitude. 
Relations between feelings occur only to the extent that repre-
sentations serve as intermediaries. A feeling can, by means of its 
representation, probe within, as it were, and elicit a feeling about 
a feeling. One such feeling is pity about one's own suffering, an-
other, joy at one's own good fortune. Suffering and happiness must 
be represented in images if they are to elicit a feeling concerning 
them. Self-pity is not a repetition of one's suffering but a dis-
tinctively mellow, moving feeling that is quite different from sharp 
physical pains, for instance, or sorrow at a bereavement. The feel-
ing of happiness about one's own power elicits pride in oneself. 
·Here too feeling and feeling about feeling are different in charac-
ter, indicating the structural nature of this relation. Somewhat 
more complex, yet still undoubtedly factually demonstrable, is the 
structural relation between re-feeling another's feeling and pity or 
sympathetic joy. The simplest cases arise when a strong expression 
of feeling is re-felt by me. Then, pity for the other's suffering is 
neither an attenuated repetition of that suffering nor its re-feeling; 
rather, it stands in a structural relation to the process of re-feeling. 
Self-observation shows indubitably that, in many cases, gloating, 
envy, or a grudge arise because another's happiness leads to a de-
crease of one's own self-feeling. Then, through intermediary repre-
sentations such as judgments, this decrease elicits a feeling of envy 
toward the happy person. In the case of gloating, we find that the 
re-living of another's unhappiness elicits joy at another's unhappi-
ness only through a sense of one's own self-enhancement. When 
55 
another pupil is punished, a lad rejoices at his own uninjured skin. 
Such relations can also connect more remote lived experiences 
with one another. A kindness shown by another is felt as pleasant, 
and it is perhaps only when repeated little kindnesses are added up 
that a feeling of gratitude is evoked. Here too it lies in the nature 
of the structural relation that the enjoyment of the kindness is not 
repeated as joy combined with a focus on its cause, but that a new 
feeling of a distinct sort arises. It lies in the nature of this relation 
that new members can be added, as one inference to another. An-
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
77 
other's suffering elicits pity; the intensity with which I feel pity can 
elicit pity for myself as the one who now suffers so intensely. 
We distinguish from the relation contained in feelings about 
feelings another relation that we designate as "transference." If 
part of an object has aroused a disagreeable feeling, this can then 
be imparted to the whole object. The disagreeable feeling pro-
duced by bad news can be transferred to the whole person who 
announced it. 
5. THE SYSTEM OF THE RELATIONS BETWEEN FEELINGS AS 
DELIMITED FROM THE SYSTEMS OF OBJECTIVE 
APPREHENSION AND OF WILLING 
The totality of feelings is delimited as a systematically connected 
whole on the basis of structural relations. And indeed, there can 
be no doubt, from the standpoint of pure description, about its 
delimitation from objective apprehension. We found the structure 
of these two systems to be thoroughly different. But the delimita-
tion of the structural nexus of feeling from that of willing is much 
more difficult. Here we ask not whether willing is an independent 
function, but are concerned only with the descriptive question 
whether in its structure, willing is different from the structure of 
feeling. 
Just as the attitude involved in feeling is <delimited> from that 
involved in objective apprehension, it can also be delimited from 
the volitional attitude. Any process of objective apprehension can 
serve as condition and foundation for feeling. Objective apprehen-
sion, together with feeling, similarly provides the foundation for 
the volitional attitude. Setting purposes is grounded in the lived 
56 
experience of values. Thus there is an inner link that proceeds 
from feeling through impulse and desire to will. One could assume 
that feeling is merely the first form of those attitudes that achieve 
their final form in a voluntary decision and in purposive action. A 
continuum in which feelings, emotional states, and desires are so 
connected that they appear only as forms and stages of the same 
attitude is cited in support of this assumption. Also the opposition 
that we found between pleasure and displeasure appears to con-
tinue on into that between desire and resistance. But this continu-
ity holds good in the same way at the boundary of sensation and 
feeling. In both cases, the continuity consists in the fact that one of 
the functions has its foundation in the other- feeling in sensation, 
and will in feeling- and that, given this foundation, intensification 
STUDIES 
occurs on the basis of a minimal activation of the higher func-
tions. The opposition of pleasure and displeasure, of seeking and 
avoiding, is merely the foundation for setting purposes. Every voli-
tional decision, as such, is positive, even when avoidance consti-
tutes its content. The tendency to actualize the object of a drive, 
desire, or will separates this attitude entirely from that of feeling. 
Although supported by feeling, the volitional attitude manifests 
something that can neither be derived from feeling nor compared 
with it. 
Two reasons seem to me to speak compellingly in favor of sep-
arating the feeling attitude from the volitional. There is a broad 
range of feelings that release no incentives toward action. These 
are the feelings by which artistic enjoyment is produced. Such en-
joyment derives from the fact that the objects of these feelings are 
removed from the context of reality in which our will intervenes. 
Processes that otherwise would incite us to action do not disturb 
us in our nonvolitional attitude. It is also important that no re-
striction of the will and no pressure toward me result from what I 
sympathetically experience about the persons or fates that appear 
here. As long as I remain in the region of art, the pressure of 
reality is lifted from my soul. What happens on the stage, given 
even the most extreme realism, can only arouse an uneducated 
person to take counteraction if he confuses the artistic illusion 
with reality. The most perfect instance of effects of feeling that are 
free of will is to be found in music. For here, mere imaginary 
creations, such as themes and melodies, evoke feelings. Although 
57 
they draw their strongest relation to the human life of feeling from 
the mimical aspects of expression, these themes or rhythms are but 
shadows of expression in speech, lifted to the lawlike order of 
tonal relations and thus transfigured into pure beauty. They are 
liberated from the determinate volitional content of real life. Ac-
cordingly, the most intense expression of the aspiring will as it 
confronts us in a symphony of Beethoven still does not move us to 
resistance or exercise any pressure upon us. The expression of a 
powerful will, liberated from all content and raised to the regu-
larity of relations of tones and transformed by them, invites us 
only to a volition-free apprehension of the forms of the volitional 
attitude. And that is not because weak, pleasant feelings are pro-
duced. There are artistic effects of such intensity that they can be 
surpassed only by few kinds of pleasure. The possibility peculiar 
to vocal music of allowing simultaneous objects of the highest in-
tensity of feeling to affect us and of bringing the richness of life 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
79 
itself to our consciousness produces so intense a feeling of rapture 
that we find here one of the highest possible effects of feeling as 
such. This happens, for instance, in the great ball scene of [Mo-
zart's] Don Giovanni, or when Bach in his cantatas blends the 
sublime, calm seriousness of transcendent effects and the restless, 
sonorous fluctuations of the soul between hope and fear. It is not a 
case of a lack of strength of feeling, nor is there anything that 
interrupts the progression of this feeling toward willing. Rather, it 
is clear that there are circumstances in which our feelings have no 
tendency at all to stimulate volitional processes and actions. There 
are still other forms of strong feelings that are similar to those 
evoked by works of art and that also, as a rule, arouse no volition. 
The feeling for nature seems to provide such a further instance. 
And in the same way, the enjoyment of social pleasure in watching 
festivals and games need not arouse any striving to participate in 
them, even when the enjoyment is very strong. 
SUPPLEMENT: COMPLETION OF THE INNER TELEOLOGY 
OF THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF FEELINGS 
IN OBJECTIVE FORMATIONS 
The immanent teleology of the sequence of feelings finds its com-
pletion in the creation of objective formations and in experiencing 
them with feeling. Influences of the external world appear to in-
trude again and again, disturbing the regularity of the course of 
feelings. If we feel at one with nature, moments that tend toward 
the destruction of this unity seem to lie in nature itself. There 
58 
seems to us to be something alien in nature, something that we 
can never entirely match in feeling; it manifests a lawfulness that 
has nothing to do with the lawfulness or regularity of the course 
of our feelings. It is the chasm between us and nature that dawns 
on us. But what destroys the harmony derives not only from na-
ture but also from ourselves. Even while absorbed in nature, mem-
ories awaken and arouse feelings that are not based in nature but 
belong entirely to our own ego. We suddenly remember an offense 
someone has inflicted on us, and we are angered by it; we think of 
future occurrences; hopes and fears are awakened. What does na-
ture know of all that? It lies calmly in the twilight while we tor-
ment ourselves with our thoughts. Man in his egoism becomes 
alien to nature; the unity is destroyed. Whereas these contradic-
tions between egoism and what is objectively given drive humans 
to find a higher unity of value, they also seek to establish the unity 
8o 
STUDIES 
within their own moods by creating new, imaginative, objective 
forms. Works of art are created in which the divergence between 
the inner regularity of feelings and outer lawfulness is canceled. 
What is given to intuition is grasped in new forms, in new regu-
larities. These forms alone make it possible to link what is intuited 
with a unitary complex or sequence of feelings. Only here do the 
structural relations between feelings get fully clarified. In the con-
templation of art, feelings follow one another in inner lawlike 
structural relations; all these feelings form a whole. We can experi-
ence this whole again in a state of feeling, in an interpenetration of 
all our different lived experiences; all the feelings different from 
one another, but internally connected, are interwoven into a total 
result, a total mood. Often with music, for example, a definite 
state of feeling suggests itself; it is then thoroughly experienced 
sequentially until at the end the same state of feeling returns. Hav-
ing been led through its various stages, it has achieved full con-
sciousness. Only by a remote analogy with the cognitive process 
could one say that the total feeling finds its fulfillment through the 
single stages, that the total feeling has become a whole in which 
everything has found its fulfillment. Instead, this state of affairs 
manifests itself in each of the variations on one and the same 
theme in music and in the recapitulation or the perfected articula-
tion of the theme at the end. What is already implicit in a total 
59 
feeling is brought explicitly to consciousness in a regular sequence, 
in order then to become again a higher unity. Thus it may be the 
task of art as such to bring to distinct and thorough conscious-
ness, to live through, the structural unities of feelings present or 
inherent in every human being. The most powerful means it has 
for this is contrast. Other feelings seem to want to press forward 
against the given state of feeling; but from each of these conflicts, 
the state of feeling emerges more purely and explicitly. It may be a 
law in the life of feeling that a total feeling can achieve full con-
sciousness and find its fulfillment only in conflict with other 
feelings. 
From this perspective, we can cast a glance into the teleology of 
the life of feeling. In the course of aesthetic feeling, means and end 
are not foreign to each other. There are no indifferent means to-
ward a worthwhile end. It is the structured whole itself that is the 
end. This whole is not an abstraction, a concept; nor is it a cate-
gorial formation of elements disparate in themselves. Rather, the 
whole itself is given to us in its entirety in a lived experience, and 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
81 
is realized in a structural nexus of simultaneously present emo-
tional elements. 
Now the question arises for the aesthetician, What characteris-
tics must an intuitively given whole have in order that the feelings 
produced can be structurally unified with one another? If there 
were no inner relations between intuition and feeling, no art would 
be possible. Every form of art necessarily presupposes certain uni-
formities in the inner relations between feeling and intuition. It is 
necessary that, under the same conditions, the same state of feel-
ing have a structural relation to intuitive equivalents. Thus there 
exist in art certain uniformities such as rhythm, variations of one 
and the same theme, or of the same linear motif, symmetry, that 
explicate and bring to consciousness equivalent states of feeling in 
different forms. 
Since the inner lawfulness of sequences of moods finds its com-
pletion in art, it continues to be our human task to shape the 
sequence of our affective reactions into a completed unity and 
make it an affectively self-enclosed unity. History shows us ever 
renewed efforts of people to stylize themselves without them be-
lieving that they can shape all of their affective reactions into a 
unity. Only in the unity of a great passion can they attain unity for 
themselves. Everything small and trivial must be discarded. But 
human beings can never be content with the negation of their af-
fective reactions in favor of one passion. The entire complicated 
6o 
web of such affective reactions calls for a unitary formation. Other 
kinds of feelings and states of feelings are raised to human con-
sciousness by great artists and stimulate us to seek a new affective 
unity on the basis of other sorts of affective elements. Affective 
types of entire epochs and entire peoples are formed; in addition, 
the individual seeks to realize an affective unity unique to himself. 
On the basis of this regularization of the emotions, affective modes 
of expression also attain their definite formation. In visual art, in 
theatrical style, in the intercourse of human life, a certain unifor-
mity of external movements arises as the expression for an inner 
affective unity. 
Finally, the structural system of the feelings of value finds its 
completion in certain objective universal systems of value. Here 
the whole world is apprehended from a unitary perspective of 
value. The world is good or evil, or a principle of good and a 
principle of evil exist in it. Or within this world, facts are singled 
out and designated as good or evil, and everything else is evalu-
6I 
82 
STUDIES 
ated in relation to these facts. Or one creates transcendent forma-
tions that alone give the immanent a completion of value. Then 
pervasive evaluative states of feeling emerge, such as pessimism or 
optimism. In conjunction with the various reactions of individuals, 
these great states of value-feeling obtain a distinctive coloration. 
There can be a pessimism that is despairing, or angry and rebel-
lious, or sad and calmly resigned, or distressed and pitiful. But 
here too a human being cannot find satisfaction in being limited to 
one great value-feeling. Here too the totality of value-feelings calls 
for a unitary formation. We search for an objective nexus of values 
in which the multiplicity of our value-feelings, our satisfactions 
and dissatisfactions, our feeling for what is beautiful and ugly, for 
what is good and evil, and all other value-feelings find expression 
in their various stages and nuances. Here purposive systems aris-
ing from a volitional attitude can give values a systematic unity 
that objectively completes the inner structural nexus of value-
feelings. 
2. Willing 
(FIRST FRAGMENT) 
1. THE SCOPE OF ITS LIVED EXPERIENCES 
By willing, I understand a determinate attitude that emerges from 
a large multiplicity of lived experiences, and on the basis of which 
a nexus of determinate lived experiences results. In these lived ex-
periences, we possess a reflexive awareness of an intention to real-
ize a state of affairs. This is not comparable to the relationships of 
re-presenting and what is based on objective apprehension, or to 
joy about something or sorrow over something in feeling. Like the 
other two attitudes, willing displays a relation to something hav-
ing content; this is the object that is willed. The process refers to 
this objective something. It is an attitude, but the special nature of 
this attitude can only be experienced; it cannot be presented in 
concepts. To say that it involves an intention, a tendency to realize 
an object, a causal efficacy, or to say that in it a purpose is posited 
to be realized is merely to give an external designation of this 
indefinable attitude. I specify that it refers to something having 
content in the determinate mode of a tendency toward realization; 
and in designating this attitude, I use categories that have their 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
83 
origin precisely in the will. If this characteristic, which never oc-
curs alone in a lived experience, is abstracted from lived experi-
ence, then it can be designated as a function, as a component of 
the psychic nexus. Wherever willing appears as constituting a lived 
experience, it is always related to something having content that 
ought to be realized; and, for that reason, we call it an attitude. It 
emerges in an ordered series of states that is determined by a pro-
gressive differentiation. Such states are drives, strivings, decisions, 
and a volitional nexus. 
But since this intention is influenced by circumstances and emerges 
amid the cooperation of individuals, still further states arise that 
are conditioned by it and must be attributed to the same attitude. 
The circumstances in which any form of willing appears can hin-
der the intention contained in it: a consciousness of resistance 
emerges, pressure is exerted by the external world. This hindrance 
need not elicit displeasure in every instance; some people like to be 
disturbed in their work, and in any case, the reflexive awareness of 
this hindrance is distinct from the feeling of displeasure that arises 
from it. A special relationship originates from the cooperation of 
62 
individuals, since a contract or a promise or the nature of the 
relation itself gives rise to an obligation of the will that constrains 
actions or forbids them. For our purposes, it does not matter how 
outer hindrance and inner obligation are interpreted psycholog-
ically. According to widespread usage, the reflexive awareness of 
these modifications of the volitional attitude is called a feeling. 
The consciousness of hindrance or of obligation is called a feeling. 
A sense of displeasure is, no doubt, often mixed in with these 
modifications of the volitional attitude. The hindrance is felt as 
painful; the obligation, as a restriction, elicits our displeasure. But 
not every hindrance or obligation is felt as a distressing pressure 
or as a restriction. There is also a happiness in restriction. There is 
something satisfying in binding a life to stable rules, as opposed to 
unbridled freedom. And the reflexive awareness of hindrance and 
obligation must be distinguished from added feelings of displea-
sure. These refer directly not to the object that hinders or the obli-
gation that binds but to being hindered, to being bound. Here it 
suffices that they occupy an important place in the nexus of rela-
tions that is grounded in the volitional attitude. For all these sorts 
of lived experience distinguished here form one nexus, which we 
designate a nexus of will. 
They are members of one whole, in which they occupy a definite 
position. Each such lived experience has a relation to the nexus of 
STUDIES 
will, the nature of which is determined by the distinctive volitional 
attitude. Lived experiences that extend over years can be con-
nected with one another through these relations. Consider Michel-
angelo's involvement in the construction of St. Peter's Basilica. 
Long interruptions occur, other plans intrude, but countless acts 
of will are related to one another across these separations by the 
specified intention. Setting a purpose entails a decision concerning 
means, even means toward means become necessary, hindrances 
make themselves felt, and obligations connected with agreements 
enter in. An extremely complex whole [results] in which individual 
acts over the course of years are conditioned by an intention. All 
these acts in turn are permeated by the kind of relations that are 
conditioned by the nature of the volitional attitude. Feelings, per-
ceptions, deliberations insert themselves everywhere. Determina-
tions of the will continue to be effective in re-presentations, which 
are not themselves [acts of] will, but merely possess the capacity to 
re-present or to elicit willing. 
63 
Thus we again confront a structural nexus that extends through 
the processes that emerge and vanish in psychic life, as they are 
variously conditioned from without or from within: a permanent 
framework, as it were, or an ordered system of relations that re-
flects the nature of the attitude. 
In order to penetrate into the nature of this system, we must 
analyze these lived experiences more closely. 
2. ANALYSIS OF WILLING 
The form of willing in which the constituents of the process are 
most clearly distinguished occurs whenever it is directed toward 
the realization of an external change and when a conscious choice 
of ends and means continues along the path to this goal. In the 
context of life, there must always first be a moment contained in 
the present state, which makes itself felt as a need and is grounded 
in enduring dispositions such as drives, habitual desires, and pas-
sions. For even the efficacy of ethical norms of action is bound to 
their content. From without or from within, the course of life pro-
vides occasions that influence the conditions contained in such dis-
positions. Implicit in these conditions is the move to representa-
tions of a state that is to be realized and which has a relationship 
to those dispositions. If we call this state to be reached a purpose, 
then what is willed in this purpose is satisfaction of some sort, and 
the future state itself is basically only a means to this satisfaction. 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
8 5 
Right away it is important to emphasize that such a satisfaction 
relative to objects as means is general in nature. This satisfaction 
can be sought because a determinate object awakens feelings of 
pleasure, or because the disposition itself seeks objects of satisfac-
tion. The possibility of [arousing] positive feelings inherent in an 
object constitutes the value of that object for the subject. 
Because several objects present themselves and memory pre-
serves earlier objects as later ones appear, and because several 
needs can make themselves felt in succession and the conscious-
ness of previous needs persists while later ones are already making 
themselves felt, a contest between representations of purposes 
emerges in us. In addition, since it is always merely a matter of 
producing a future state, or bringing about a change conducive to 
it as a means of satisfaction, other aspects involved in the change 
and the retroactive effects it has upon the life of feelings and drives 
can enter into conflict as negative versus positive values. Often 
64 
enough, I do not know whether, finally, I will really feel happy 
about a change vehemently desired as a means of satisfaction. The 
same relationship holds between my life of feelings and drives and 
the representations of objects that are produced by the causal 
chain of life, such as perceptions of outer objects, or thoughts con-
cerning the occurrence, be it reliable or dubious, of future states. 
Whenever several possibilities of bringing about inner or outer 
changes in order to satisfy the impulses contained in the acquired 
nexus of my psychic life present themselves thus, and whenever 
these possibilities are raised to consciousness, then a choice arises. 
And it is carried out in processes of deliberation that connect 
causal relationships and estimation of values with one another. 
Here then, a distinction makes itself felt between an act of esti-
mating values and a choice or preference. An estimation of values 
does not yet involve the urgency of having to posit a definite pur-
pose in a given moment. Willing presupposes the represented pos-
sibility of realizing an inner or outer process. The choice that it 
involves and that puts an end to the contest of representations of 
purposes allows the characteristic of self-activity or spontaneity 
contained in willing to appear especially clearly. Deliberations are 
by their nature endless; a decision puts an end to them, whenever 
one chooses, by considering that something must be done. The 
moment that serves as the telling factor in a decision we call the 
motive. 
At first, the execution of a decision has its schema in the causal 
connection of the means-ends nexus as contained in reality, subject 
86 
STUDIES 
to the determination already involved in the deliberations of choos-
ing that the purpose is realizable. Then the process of execution, 
of course, becomes subject to all the modifications of relationships 
that emerge in time. They can bring about a suspension of the 
process; they can make it advisable to choose other means than 
the ones foreseen. 
Additional properties assumed by the nexus of the sphere of 
willing are influenced by the fact that it brings about purposive 
systems that are realized in a community. Even the external orga-
nization of society can be regarded as encompassing such purpo-
sive systems. Thus willing manifests itself in community. That is 
65 
only possible because, as soon as one goes beyond the individual 
person, willing involves a relationship of determining and being 
determined, of commanding and obeying. In itself, a command is 
not subject to any ratio; it can proceed quite peculiarly from the 
untransferable motives of one person to influence others through 
the possibility of coercion inherent in the causal system. This fun-
damental relationship of commanding and obeying makes possible 
the external organization of society and finds its completion in the 
state's right of coercion. Purposive systems, however, must have a 
different ground for the possibility of cooperation. It consists in 
the fact that a purpose that can be fulfilled only in cooperation 
can find support in the commonality of human nature and espe-
cially in those properties that are basic to the same purpose in all. 
Accordingly, in every purposive act, a personality distinct from 
and raised above the empirical individual emerges, corresponding 
to the purposive attitude. 
Thus the following nexus emerges in the sphere of willing. Each 
satisfaction is already related to the state that is necessary for it to 
be realized as something more general. 22 Hence, whenever willing 
proposes a change as its purpose, this purpose stands as a particu-
lar relative to the universality of the proposal, that is, to a satisfac-
tion. Accordingly, the willing of satisfaction can also be appre-
hended as a rule grounded in the subject and under which individual 
possible changes as they produce satisfaction can be subsumed. In 
the same way, a means, insofar as it makes possible a whole series 
of satisfactions, can also be grasped as a rule, to which those indi-
vidual cases are subordinate. Thus a complex of rules emerges that 
a subject sets for itself in order to bring about a satisfied life. 
These rules presuppose the empirical needs of this subject. They 
22 Marginal note: Sigwart, Logik, vol. II, 743· (H) 
THESTRUCTURALNEXUSOFKNOWLEDGE 
87 
presuppose the typical causal system in which it is situated, and 
they determine objects and means that are thereby posited. These 
are rules of prudence and rules of life. 
The satisfaction of the subject taken as a whole rests upon a 
relationship of values to which its life is predisposed. This estima-
tion is distinctive from the start and is perfected in the subject's 
life-experience. 
But a purposive system rests upon the possibility of there being 
an interchange of value-assessments between individuals. 
Thus as we saw, the task of a common system of values was 
established. 
Regulations, laws, and rules are formed first on the basis of a 
commonality that has developed in some sphere. This common-
66 
ality makes possible an agreement in value-assessment, which in 
turn is the origin of common law, ethics, artistic technique, etc. 
If this community dissolves, then the need for a rational system 
arises, the ideal of deriving norms from the rational order of value 
determinations, and finally from them the order of prescripts, 
rules, regulations, and laws. This is the origin of the natural sys-
tem of regulating life. In it, the highest norm would be that which 
is inherent in the very setting of purposes within a community. 
The Kantian moral law. Then, in every individual domain, norms 
would have to be selected insofar as they are posited by the spe-
cific purpose in accord with value-relationships. 
(SECOND FRAGMENT) 
1. THE FOUNDATION OF WILLING IN OBJECTIVE APPREHENSION 
AND lN FEELING 
Objectifying acts form the common foundation first for feeling 
and then for willing. For the volitional attitude either involves an 
object that is desired, wished for, or grasped as a purpose, or it 
involves an inner obligation to or an outer determination by some-
thing. Indeed, there is also a limit-case here, etc. 
2. DELIMITING WILLING FROM FEELING 
We find that a kind of attitude exists in the lived experience of 
willing. For here too a relation of the psychic nexus to an object 
exists in a lived experience. Of course, here again there is not al-
ways a regular relation to an object in the lived experience of will-
88 
STUDIES 
ing, as was also indicated in the case of feeling. In drives and 
striving, we are not always conscious of a specific object toward 
which they are directed. But this only means for the time being 
that the objective is indeterminate. When hurried agitation aims at 
change, everyone experiences a striving that is always directed to-
ward a new situation without its being fixed in a stable representa-
tion of a goal.23 And as a feeling can continue even when the sub-
jective state or the outer objects that elicited it are no longer noticed, 
because another lived experience claims our attention, so also, the 
inner agitation that reaches out toward the indeterminate, or the 
67 
tension that is aroused by aiming at a purpose, can persist in sen-
sory impressions or in related feelings that re-present the striving, 
even though the striving itself no longer exists.24 
And indeed, just as the attitude of willing is distinct from that of 
objective apprehension, so also is it distinct from that of feeling. 
Feeling and willing should be conceived as different attitudes, and 
not as aspects of the same attitude. I have developed the reasons 
for this claim. If they were aspects of the same attitude, then with 
increasing strength, feeling would have to pass over into willing 
whenever the threshold of intensity for releasing the will were 
passed, so to speak, and whenever no hindrance to this release 
were present from without. But many strong feelings provide coun-
ter evidence for that. And further, the foundation of willing would 
always have to be set in a feeling or in a representation of value as 
its counterpart. And this is not the case either. 
Action does not always take place in the context of striving to-
ward a good; it can also be the result of an obligation of the will. I 
have made a promise; so I must act, and I resolve to act. If I now 
form the concept of a value determining me, of loyalty, reliability, 
etc., then these virtues can only be defined by the inner relation-
ship in which the will finds itself obliged and recognizes this obli-
gation as compelling. The question whether this is connected with 
the nature of personality is irresolvable, and concerns the inter-
pretation of a finding, but not its grounding. For the absolute ought 
that appears here can never be derived from an is. 
Kant's categorical imperative contains only the logical condition 
under which a moral law is possible. The ought itself, which ne-
cessitates the moral law, is not contained in it. One confuses the 
nature of the moral law whenever one draws up a code of duties 
2
.
1 Marginal note: Husser!, Logische Untersuchungen, vol. II, 373· (H) 
24 Husser!, Logische Untersuchungen, II, 3 72. (H) 
THE STRUCTURAL NEXUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
89 
that interprets the love of God or of people or the striving for 
perfection as binding in the same way as the constraint of an obli-
gation and the truthfulness and honesty based on it. Without fail, 
violation of the latter excludes a man from cooperating with others 
in an order of common life. Violation of the so-called duties of 
love excludes one from the sphere of sympathy, and that of the so-
called duties of perfection, from a communal striving for perfec-
tion. The dignity of these duties varies considerably. And the point 
of departure for every sound ethics is contained in this distinction. 
3. THE STRUCTURAL UNITY OF THF. VOLITIONAL ATTITUDE 
The lower limit is formed by those lived experiences in which a 
displeasure without an object is connected with a striving toward 
discharge, or a mere quality of pleasure appears without an object. 
The feeling of a lack of nourishment is connected with a tension 
and a striving. Spheres of drives and of longing without an object 
[can be cited as] mere facts without any psychological explanation 
appealing to energy or pleasure. Beyond these spheres, separate 
structural unities are constituted. They are characterized by the 
inner relation either of the act in which an intuition of or a judg-
ment about an object is constituted, or of the act of relating all 
that to feeling, or of the act of striving. "Act" is a mere designa-
tion for the psychic moment in which a relation is realized. These 
different acts form a structural unity according to a law connect-
ing various attitudes. These acts can from the beginning manifest 
the quality of liberation from constraint or pressure and of realiz-
ing different pleasures. 
4. THE LEVELS OF STRUCTURAL UNITY IN LIVF.D EXPERIENCE 
AND THE RELATIONS BETWEEN LIVED EXPERIENCES 
r. The most basic structural relation consists in this, that an 
actual or remembered object elicits a reaction of feeling, and this 
passes over into a volitional attitude. Longing, striving, desiring, 
wishing. Here objects simply offer themselves, as it were, in a state 
of unreflected naivete and without being connected. 
2. Then judgments emerge as determinations of the object. Pos-
sibilities of pleasurable satisfaction are weighed; the realizability 
of the object of satisfaction is established. Willing in the narrower 
sense. The affinity of this level with judgment is based upon its 
dependence on judgment. 
68 
STUDIES 
3· Approval and disapproval as a result of value-assessment be-
come motivating grounds for action. Ethical action in the nar-
rower sense. 
Relations of these lived experiences to one another: 
I. In the direction of a hierarchy of structural unities. The lower 
levels condition the higher ones. And at the same time, the cer-
tainty of a decision and its rightness for a given person lies in the 
possibility of congruence with (verification by) lived experiences of 
feeling. Many errors arise when unfamiliar lived experiences of 
feeling, approvals, disapprovals, etc. are substituted. 
69 
2. The connection of lived experiences according to the relations 
inherent in what is given in the willing of objects. 
I. Purpose and means 
II. Obeying and commanding 
III. The forms of obligation: 
A. Obligation by an act that is common to two persons. 
B. Obligation by one's own voluntary decision. The ex-
pansion of obligation in the course of life: 
I. By work done, which binds one to the object 
2. By relationships to other persons 
3. By the disposition inherent in a voluntary decision 
These obligations permeate all of life, on the one hand stabiliz-
ing, and on the other hand, restricting life. Goethe's poem.
25 Old 
age. 
5. THE SYSTEM OF LIVED EXPERIENCES 
TN THE VOLITIONAL ATTITUDE"' 
1
' Dilthey is perhaps referring here to Goethe's Urworte. Orphisch in the verse 
cycle Gott und Welt. 
2
" Dilthey notes here that the material originally intended for this section is to be 
distributed to earlier sections. 
Third Study 
THE DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
(THIRD DRAFT) 
Interesting debates about the nature of the human sciences, espe-
cially of history, have taken place in recent decades. How can the 
human sciences be delimited from the natural sciences? What com-
prises the essence of history and its difference from the other sci-
ences? Is objective historical knowledge attainable? Without enter-
ing polemically into the opposed views that already exist in these 
debates, I set forth some considerations devoted to these same 
questions. 
1 
I begin with the question as to how another class of sciences can 
be delimited from the natural sciences, whether one chooses for 
them the expression Geisteswissenschaften or Kulturwissenschaf-
ten. The answer to this question is not a matter for speculation; it 
has a firm foundation in a fact of great importance. Besides the 
natural sciences, a group of conceptual cognitive results has emerged 
naturally from the tasks of life itself. These results are linked to 
one another by their affinity and mutual grounding. History, polit-
ical economy, the sciences of law and of the state, the studies of 
religion, of literature and poetry, of art and music, of philosophi-
cal world-view, as well as the theory and conceptual cognition of 
the historical process, are such sciences. 
Wherein, then, lies the affinity between them? In attempting to 
go back to something ultimate that they have in common with one 
another, I find that all these sciences refer to human beings, their 
relation to one another and to outer nature. At first, I disregard 
every epistemological discussion concerning the reality-value of 
what appears in experience. Such a discussion can only be under-
taken later; for the validity of concepts such as reality and objec-
tivity in the human sciences can be considered only on the basis of 
analytic preliminary work. What, then, is common to all these 
70 
92 
STUDIES 
sciences in their reference to human beings, their relations to one 
71 
another and to outer nature? They are all founded in lived experi-
ence, in the expressions for lived experiences, and in the under-
standing of these expressions. Lived experience and the under-
standing of every kind of expression of lived experiences provide 
the basis of all judgments, concepts, and cognitions that are dis-
tinctive of the human sciences. Thus a network of knowledge 
emerges in which what is experienced and understood, and re-
presentations thereof in conceptual thought, are connected with 
one another. And this network recurs in all the disciplines that the 
theory of the human sciences is about. All the properties that are 
correctly noted as constituting the essence of these sciences only 
follow from this their common essence. Thus there is a special 
relation between what is unique, singular, or individual and gen-
eral uniformities within this group of sciences. But there is a fur-
ther consequence: all the leading concepts with which these sci-
ences operate differ from the corresponding concepts of natural 
science. "Reality" has a different sense in the human sciences than 
when in our knowledge of nature we predicate it of physical ob-
jects. The categories involved in what is experienced and under-
stood and those that make their re-presentation possible in the 
sciences are different. The objectivity of knowledge that is sought 
here has a different sense; the methods for approaching the ideal 
of objectivity of knowledge here display essential differences from 
those by which we approach the conceptual cognition of nature. 
Thus this group of sciences forms its own domain, which stands 
under its own laws grounded in the nature of what can be experi-
enced, expressed, and understood. 
1 
I shall now explicate this conceptual definition. The complete 
and self-enclosed, clearly delineated process contained in every 
part of history as well as in every concept of the human sciences 
1 An inserted sheet follows here (Fasz. 54:122), designated as sheet Ia: "The first 
task is to establish what is meant by the words 'experience,' 'expression,' and 
'understanding,' and to bring these three defined phenomena to clearest conscious-
ness by reflection on them. 
"I begin with life. 
"The clearly delimited and self-enclosed process that is contained in every con-
cept of the human sciences is the course of a life. By it is understood the nexus that 
is bounded by birth and death. What do we understand by this nexus? For the 
empirical consciousness, it is to be found first of all in the existence of a person 
during his lifetime; and this existence is uninterruptedly continuous because it is 
attached to the sensory appearance of the person. But this is merely a first impres-
sion (FR) for us. For we are accustomed ... " <Manuscript breaks off here.> (H) 
THE DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
93 
is the course of a life. It forms a nexus bounded by birth and 
death. For outer perception, this is the existence of a person dur-
ing his lifetime. The property of uninterrupted constancy belongs 
to that existence. But independently thereof, there is an experi-
enceable connection that links the parts of the course of a life 
from birth to death. A decision provides an action that extends 
over several years; this nexus is often interrupted for a long time 
by life-processes of a quite different sort; yet without a new deci-
sion in the same direction having to take place, the decision con-
tinues to influence the action. Work on a related set of ideas can 
be separated by long stretches of time, and yet it is the same old 
72 
task that is taken up again. A life-plan extends itself, without its 
having to be tested again, and connects decisions, actions, resis-
tances, wishes, and hopes of the most diverse kinds. In short, 
there are connections that link the parts of the course of a life 
into a unity, quite independently of their succession in time and 
of their direct conditioning relations. This is the way the unity of 
the course of a life is experienced, and it has its certainty in such 
lived experiences. 
2 
The determination of the temporality of life is contained in the 
course of a life; the expression "course" designates just that. Time 
is not merely a line consisting of equivalent parts, a system of 
relations, of successions, of simultaneity, of duration. If we think 
of time in abstraction from what fills it, then its parts are equiva-
lent to one another. In this continuity, even the smallest part is 
linear; it is a sequence that elapses. There is never an is in the 
smallest part. Concrete time, however, consists in the restless ad-
vance of the present/ in which what is present' continually be-
comes past and the future becomes present. The present is the 
filling of a moment of time with reality. It is a lived experience in 
contrast to the memory of one and in contrast to wishing, hoping, 
expecting, or fearing something experienceable in the future. It is 
this being fulfilled with reality, then, that always and continually 
exists in advancing time, while what makes up the content of the 
lived experience constantly changes. This process of being contin-
2 die Gegenwart. 
' das Gegenwdrtige. 
94 
STUDIES 
uously fulfilled with reality in the time line, which constitutes the 
character of the present, in opposition to a representation of what 
has been or is to be experienced, this constant sinking of what is 
present back into a past and the becoming-present of what we 
have just expected, willed, or feared, which also was only in the 
region of the represented- this is the character of real time. The 
result of this is that we always live in the present and that our life 
is marked by a constant corruptibility. This process of continu-
ously filling the moment of time with reality entails further that, 
whenever its continuity is not interrupted- as in sleep or other 
states of a similar sort- the present follows without break or tear 
and is always there. Only in it is there the fulfillment of time and 
73 
consequently the fullness of life. The ship of our life is, as it were, 
borne forward upon a stream that is constantly advancing, and 
the present is always the wave where we live, suffer, and will- in 
short, where we experience our reality in its fullness. But we are 
incessantly propelled forward with this stream, so that at the same 
moment in which the future becomes a present, the latter already 
sinks into the past. The difference between a lived experience-
which also includes the lived experience of remembering or of ex-
pecting the future or of willing to realize it- and the representa-
tions of a past or future that emerge in the lived experience is 
always experienceable by us. The character of the course of our 
life consists in the endless relations between such a present, past, 
and future. Since the present never is, and even the smallest part of 
the continual advance in time contains the present and a memory 
of what was just present, what is present as such is never experi-
enceable. Moreover, the connection of what is remembered with 
the present, the continued existence of the qualitatively deter-
mined reality, and the continued efficacy of the past as a force in 
the present imparts to what is remembered its own character of 
presence. Whatever forms a lived unit of experience in the flow of 
time, because it has a unitary meaning in the course of life, is the 
smallest unit that we can designate a lived experience. But beyond 
that, linguistic usage designates as lived experience even that more 
comprehensive ideal unity of the parts of life that has a meaning 
for the course of life, and applies this concept even when the mo-
ments are separated by intervening processes. 4 
• There follow some sketchy notes written in pencil in Dilthey's hand, beginning 
with "Lived experience in the Middle Ages." (H) 
THE DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
9 5 
3 
Thus we come upon the category of meaning. It provides the rela-
tion that determines and articulates the apprehension of the course 
of our life. But it is also the point of view according to which we 
grasp and explicate simultaneous and successive life-courses in his-
tory, making prominent what is significant, shaping every event 
according to its meaning. Generally, it is the category distinctive of 
life and the historical world. It inhabits life as the distinctive rela-
tion that holds between its parts, and this relation inhabits life and 
makes it possible to explicate and narrate it wherever it extends. 
In accordance with the nature of time, I possess the distinctive 
nexus of my life only if I recollect its course. Memory involves an 
74 
extensive series of cooperative processes; not one of them is repro-
ducible in isolation. Even in memory, a selection takes place; and 
the principle for this selection consists in the meaning that the 
particular lived experiences had for the understanding of the nexus 
of the course of my life at the time when they occurred and as 
retained in the assessment of later times, or else the meaning that 
they received from a new comprehension of my life-nexus while 
the memory was still fresh. And now, as I think back about what I 
can still reproduce, only that which has a meaning for my life as I 
regard it today gets a place in the nexus of my life. On the basis of 
my present comprehension of life, each part of my life that is sig-
nificant today receives the gestalt in which it is apprehended by 
me. From this comprehension, a relation of concern about other 
significant parts emerges; it belongs to a nexus that is determined 
by the relations of the significant moments of life to my present 
interpretation thereof. These meaning references or concerns con-
stitute the present lived experience and permeate it. On the occa-
sion of a renewed visit with a person who means something to me, 
this lived experience receives its fullness from what was significant 
in previous meetings: the older lived experiences merge into a 
stronger unity that arises from their reference to something pres-
ent. This reference or concern is so intimate and special that I can 
feel as if I have never been absent from this person. Similarly, in a 
gallery that I have visited repeatedly, the entire fullness of my pres-
ent artistic experience proceeds from what was already meaningful 
for me, no matter how much time separates today's visit from the 
previOus ones. 
STUDIES 
The expression of this is autobiography. It is an interpretation 
of life in its mysterious combination of chance, destiny, and char-
acter. Wherever we look, our consciousness is working to come to 
terms with life. We suffer from our destinies as from our nature, 
and thus they force us to reconcile ourselves with them through 
understanding. The past entices us mysteriously to come to know 
the web of meaning of its moments. And its interpretation remains 
unsatisfying. We will never be done with what we call chance: 
what has become ~ignificant for our life, whether wonderful or 
fearsome, seems to enter always through the door of chance. 
The same relation between the meaning of particular lived expe-
riences and the sense of the whole course of life holds in poetry. 
But here it displays an entirely new freedom, for the imagination 
75 
can release events from the constraint of reality and shape them 
based on the consciousness of their meaning for life.5 Great epic 
poems arise when, on the basis of a relation significant for life, 
which we designate as a motif, a historical event passes over into 
the presentation of its significance. Then everything about the 
event that is not a necessary moment for the narration of its mean-
ing sinks away. The heroic epic is a higher compound in which 
certain heroic poems that belong together attain a higher dignity 
in grasping the meaning of life by virtue of the relation of their 
motifs to a comprehensive nexus of meaning. The chivalrous epic 
contains a still higher level in the interpretation of life. 
A higher form of interpretation arises in drama. The interpreta-
tion of life becomes proportionately more concentrated and pro-
nounced when tragedy ... 
The same relationship of the meaning of the particular to the 
understanding of a [larger] context of lived experience also holds 
in the fine arts. This is the basis for the affinity between the arts of 
a historical age, namely, an understanding informed by the mean-
ing of particulars and the techniques dependent on it in the artistic 
domains. The visual arts are differentiated from photographs or 
wax moldings by the fact that they bring the significant to under-
standing and give it validity. In the multiplicity of momentary vi-
sual experiences of landscapes, of interiors, of human counte-
' Insertion in Dilthey's hand: "The configuration received by an event when the 
meaning of its parts is thrown into relief by a given stretch of a life-course consti-
tutes a poetic whole. And since this coherence of the event at the same time con-
tains in itself a part of the meaning of life, the event becomes symbolic. Not by any 
extraneous trait of poetry, but because it is already that way in life. And technique 
is determined accordingly." (H) 
THE DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
97 
nances, the apprehension of the significant moment constantly 
changes. What appears here is not an objective portrayal or pre-
sentation but always a life-concern. A forest at dusk stands power-
fully and almost fearsomely before the spectator; similarly, the 
houses in a valley with their quiet lights elicit the impression of an 
intimate coziness because they are apprehended on the basis of 
some life-concern. The life-images we have of a person are vari-
ously conditioned by how that person relates to a life-concern. 
This emerges even more strongly in scenic paintings where the un-
derstanding of an event forms the focal point. 
All the changes that the fine arts experience in their develop-
ment have no effect on this relationship, by which every work 
produces the understanding of something appearing in space through 
the meaning-relation between its parts, and only the mode of this 
relation is different .... 
BlANK PAGE 
PART II 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL 
WORLD IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
TRANSLATED BY 
RuDOLF A. MAKKREEL AND joHN ScANLON 
77 
BlANK PAGE 
I. DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN 5CIENCES 1 
My aim is to provide a preliminary delimitation of the human 
sciences from the natural sciences, by means of certain characteris-
tics. Interesting debates have taken place in recent decades con-
cerning the natural sciences and human sciences, especially history. 
Without entering into the views that oppose one another in these 
debates, I propose a different attempt to cognize the nature of the 
human sciences and to delimit them from the natural sciences. 
Only further investigation will be able to attain a complete grasp 
of the difference. 
I 
I take my point of departure from a wide-ranging state of affairs 
that provides the firm foundation for every dispute concerning the 
human sciences. Besides the natural sciences, a group of concep-
79 
tual cognitive results emerged naturally from the tasks of life itself. 
These results are linked to one another by their common object. 
History, political economy, the sciences of law and of the state, the 
study of religion, literature, poetry, architecture, music, of philo-
sophical world-views and systems, and finally, psychology are such 
sciences. All these sciences refer to the same grand fact: the human 
race- which they describe, narrate, and judge, and about which 
So 
they form concepts and theories. 
What one customarily separates as physical and psychical is un-
divided in this fact of the human sciences. It contains the living 
nexus of both. We ourselves belong to nature, and nature is at 
work in us, unconsciously, in dark drives. States of consciousness 
are constantly expressed in gestures, looks, and words; and they 
' Papers delivered to the Academy of the Sciences over many years up to January 
20, 19Io, on such topics as the delimitation of the human sciences, the structural 
system of knowledge, lived experience, and understanding form the basis for the 
present work. My study "The Structural Nexus of Knowledge" has its foundation 
in the study "The Psychic Structural Nexus," which was read on March 2, r 90 5, 
and printed in the Proceedings of the Academy, March r6 (see the preceding 
studies in this volume). These can merely be briefly summarized and expanded 
here. Of the unpublished studies included in the present work, "The Delimitation 
of the Human Sciences" is simply reproduced here; those on lived experience and 
on understanding are expanded. For the rest, what is presented here follows my 
lectures on logic and on the system of philosophy. (D) 
I02 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
have their objectivity in institutions, states, churches, and scientific 
institutes. History operates in these very contexts. 
Of course, this does not exclude the possibility that the human 
sciences employ the distinction between the physical and the psy:.. 
chical whenever their purposes require it. But then they must re-
main conscious that they are working with abstractions, not with 
entities, and that these abstractions are valid only within the limits 
of the point of view within which they are projected. I now pre-
sent the point of view from which the following fundamental study 
distinguishes between the psychical and the physical, and which 
defines the sense in which I use these terms. The first givens are 
lived experiences. But, as I have attempted to show previously/ 
they belong to a nexus that persists as permanent amidst all sorts 
of changes throughout the entire course of a life. What I have 
previously described as the acquired nexus of psychic life emerges 
from that foundation; it encompasses our representations, evalua-
tions, and purposes, and it exists in the connection of these con-
stituents.3 And in each of these constituents, the acquired nexus 
exists in distinctive connections- in relationships of representa-
tions, in assessments of values, in the ordering of purposes. We 
possess this nexus; it operates constantly in us; representations 
and states found in consciousness are oriented to it; our impres-
sions are apperceived by means of it; and it regulates our affects. 
Thus it is always present and always efficacious, but without being 
conscious. I cannot imagine what objection could be raised if this 
nexus of lived experiences within the course of a life is singled out 
from a person by an abstraction and, as the psychical, is made the 
logical subject of judgments and theoretical discussions. The for-
mation of this concept of the psychical is justified by the fact that 
81 
what is singled out in it as a logical subject makes possible judg-
ments and theories that are necessary for the human sciences. The 
concept of the physical is equally legitimate. Sensations, impres-
sions, and images appear in lived experience. For practical pur-
poses, physical objects are posited as underlying our impressions 
as a constructive device. Both concepts can be used only if we 
remain conscious that they are merely abstracted from the factu-
ally given human being- they designate not full realities but only 
legitimately formed abstractions. 
2 Proceedings, March 16, 1905, pp. 332ff. See above, GS VII, nff. [this volume, 
32-36]. (D) 
.l Concerning the acquired nexus of psychic life, see my "Poetic Imagination and 
Madness," Address, 1886, pp. 13ff. (GS VI, 142ff.), "The Imagination of the Poet" 
(SW 5, 96-98), Ideas (GS V, 217ff. [D]; see SW 2). 
DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
103 
The [logical] subjects of assertions in the human sciences vary in 
their scope- individuals, families, more complex groups, nations, 
epochs, historical movements or developmental sequences, social 
organizations, systems of culture, and other segments of the whole 
of humanity, and finally humanity itself. They can be the subjects 
of narratives, they can be described, and theories can be developed 
concerning them. But they always refer to the same fact: humanity 
or human-socio-historical reality. Thus the possibility occurs at 
first of defining this group of sciences by their common reference 
to this same fact, humanity, and of delimiting them from the natu-
ral sciences. Also, this common reference has as a further conse-
quence a relationship of mutual grounding among assertions con-
cerning the logical subjects contained in the fact of humanity. The 
two classes of the above mentioned sciences- the study of history 
up to the description of the present state of society and the system-
atic human sciences- are everywhere dependent on each other 
and thus form a stable nexus. 
2 
Although this conceptual definition of the human sciences con-
tains correct assertions concerning them, it does not exhaust their 
essence. We must inquire into the kind of relation the human sci-
ences have to the fact of humanity. That is the only way their 
object can be precisely established. For it is clear that the human 
sciences and natural sciences cannot be logically divided into two 
classes by means of two spheres of facts formed by them. Physiol-
ogy also deals with an aspect of man, and it is a natural science. 
Consequently, the basis for distinguishing the two classes cannot 
82 
be found in the facts taken on their own. The human sciences 
must be related differently to the physical and to the psychical 
aspects of man. And that is in fact the case. 
A tendency that is grounded in the subject-matter itself is at 
work in these sciences. The study of language includes the physiol-
ogy of the speech organs just as much as the theory of the mean-
ing of words and the sense of sentences. The course of a modern 
war encompasses the chemical effects of gunpowder just as much 
as the moral characteristics of the soldiers who stand in the smoke 
from the guns. But there is a tendency in the nature of the group 
of sciences that we are considering to reduce the physical aspect of 
processes to the mere role of conditions or of means of under-
standing. And this tendency develops ever more strongly as these 
104 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
sciences advance. It is the direction toward self-reflection; it is the 
path of understanding from without to within. This tendency uti-
lizes every expression of life for the comprehension of the inner 
[life] from which it proceeds~ In historical narratives we read of 
economic work, settlements, wars, the founding of states. They fill 
our souls with grand images, they instruct us about the historical 
world that surrounds us. But what moves us especially in these 
reports is something inaccessible to the senses, something found 
only in lived experience, which is implicit in the outer processes 
that arise from it and which in turn react back on it. And this 
tendency does not rest upon a perspective that approaches life 
from without. It is grounded in life itself. For every value of life is 
contained in this experienceable aspect; all the outer noise of his-
tory revolves around it. Here purposes appear of which nature 
knows nothing. The will brings about development and organiza-
tion. And it is in this creative, responsible, spiritual world rising 
sovereignly from us-and only in it-that life has its value, pur-
pose, and meaning. 
One could say that two great tendencies come to play in all 
scientific endeavors. 
Man finds himself determined by nature. This can even include 
sparse psychic processes that emerge here and there. From this 
perspective, they appear as interpolations in the great text of the 
physical world. At the same time, this idea of the world based on 
spatial extension is the original source of all knowledge of unifor-
mities, and we are advised from the start to reckon with them. We 
gain control of this physical world by the study of its laws. These 
laws can only be discovered insofar as the lived character of our 
impressions of nature, the connection we have with nature to the 
83 
extent that we are ourselves part of it, and the lively feeling in 
which we enjoy it recede ever more behind the abstract compre-
hension of it according to the relations of time, space, mass, and 
motion. All these moments work together to ensure that man 
effaces himself in order to construct- on the basis of his impres-
sions- this great object, nature, as an order governed by laws. It 
then becomes the center ofreality for man. 
But the same human being then turns back from it to life, to 
himself. This return of man to the lived experience by means· of 
which nature is there for him, to life in which alone meaning, 
value, and purpose appear, is the other great tendency that deter-
mines scientific work. A second center emerges. Everything that 
confronts mankind, all its creations and activities, the purposive 
DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
105 
systems in which it lives out its life, the external organizations of 
society in which individual human beings unite- all that obtains a 
new unity here. Here understanding returns from the sensorily 
given in human history to that which never appears to the senses 
but nevertheless works itself out and expresses itself externally. 
And as that first tendency aims to comprehend even the psychic 
nexus in the language of natural-scientific thought, with its con-
cepts and methods- alienating itself, as it were- so this second 
tendency expresses itself in the reference of the sensorily external 
course of human events back to something that never appears to 
the senses- in reflection upon what manifests itself in that exter-
nal process. History shows how the sciences that refer to human 
life are engaged in a constant approximation to the more remote 
goal of human self-reflection. 
But this tendency also reaches out beyond the human world to 
nature itself, which- though it can never be understood, only con-
structed- it strives to make intelligible by means of concepts that 
are grounded in the psychic nexus, as was done by Fichte, Schell-
ing, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Fechner/ Lotze,' and their followers. 
They attempt to discern the sense of nature, which can never be 
fully cognized, however. 
At this point, the sense of the conceptual pair of outer and inner 
becomes clear, as well as the right to use these concepts. They 
designate the relation that holds in understanding between an 
outer sensory appearance of life and that which produced it and 
expresses itself in it. This relationship of outer and inner exists 
84 
only as far as understanding reaches, just as the relationship of 
phenomena to that by means of which they are constructed exists 
only as far as the conceptual cognition of nature reaches. 
3 
Now we arrive at the point at which a more precise determination 
of the essence and connection of that group of sciences with which 
we began can be made. 
4 Gustav Theodor Fechner (r8or-87), German physicist, philosopher, and psy-
chologist; founder of psychophysics; author of Vorschule der Aesthetik and other 
works. 
s Rudolf Hermann Lotze (r8r7-8r), German philosopher, who developed a 
metaphysics that grounds life and consciousness in the mechanistic order of nature 
but orients them to ideal values; author of Mikrokosmus. 
106 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
We separated off humanity first from a kindred organic nature 
and then from a more remote inorganic nature- differentiating 
parts from the whole of the earth. These parts constitute levels; 
and humanity could be delimited from the level of animal exis-
tence as that level in which concepts, estimations of value, realiza-
tions of purpose, responsibility, and consciousness of the meaning 
of life appear. We then defined the most universal property of our 
group of sciences as their having a common reference to human 
beings, to humanity. The system of these sciences is grounded 
therein. Then we contemplated the special nature of this relation 
that holds between these sciences and the fact of humanity. This 
fact may not simply be designated as the common object of these 
sciences. Rather, their object only arises in a special relationship to 
humanity, but one that is not brought to it from without but is 
founded in its essence. Whether they be institutions, customs, 
books, works of art, such phenomena always contain, like man 
himself, a reference back from an outer sensory aspect to one that 
is withdrawn from the senses and therefore inner. 
Now we need to determine this inner aspect further. Here it is a 
common error to resort to the psychic course of life- psychol-
ogy- to account for our knowledge of this inner aspect. I shall 
attempt to overcome this error by means of the following consid-
erations. 
The apparatus of law books, judges, plaintiffs, and defendants, 
as manifested in a specific time and place, is first of all the expres-
sion of a purposive system of legal rules and norms in terms of 
which this apparatus functions. This purposive system is directed 
toward the external obligation of wills in a univocal estimation 
that brings about the coercively realizable conditions for the per-
fection of the relationships of life and delimits the spheres of 
power of individuals in their relation to one another, to things, 
and to the common will. The form of law must therefore be one of 
8 5 
imperatives behind which the power of a community stands to 
enforce them. Thus the historical understanding of the laws exist-
ing within such a community at a determinate time consists in a 
regress from that outer apparatus to the system of legal impera-
tives that has its outer existence in that apparatus, and that was 
produced by the common will. Ihering6 discusses the spirit of Ro-
man law in that sense. The understanding of that spirit is not psy-
6 Rudolf von Ihering (or Jhering) (r8r8-92), German legal scholar, considered 
the founder of sociological jurisprudence; author of Geist des romischen Rechts 
and Der Zweck im Recht, among other works. 
DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
107 
chological cognition. It is a regress to a spiritual formation that 
has its own structure and lawfulness. Jurisprudence rests on it, 
from the interpretation of a point in the Corpus Juris to concep-
tual cognition of Roman law and the comparison of legal systems 
with one another. Consequently, its object is not identical with the 
external facts and occurrences through which and in which the 
law runs its course. These facts are the object of jurisprudence 
only insofar as they realize the law. The capture of criminals, the 
illnesses of witnesses, or the apparatus of execution belong as such 
to pathology and technology. 
The same thing is true of aesthetics. The work of a poet lies 
before me. It consists of letters on a page that were composed by 
typesetters and printed by machines. But literary history and po-
etics are concerned only with the reference of this sensory nexus of 
words to what is expressed by them. And the decisive point is this: 
What is expressed is not the inner processes in the poet; it is rather 
a nexus created in them but separable from them. The nexus of a 
drama consists in a distinctive relation of material, poetic mood, 
motif, plot, and means of presentation. Each of these moments 
performs a function in the structure of the work. And these func-
tions are interconnected by an inner law of poetry. Thus the object 
that literary history or poetics deals with at first is completely dis-
tinct from psychic processes in the poet or his readers. Here a 
spiritual nexus is realized that enters the world of the senses, and 
which we understand by a regress from that world. 
These examples illustrate the subject-matter of those sciences of 
which we are speaking, how their essence is based on it, and how 
they are delimited from the sciences of nature. These too have 
their object, not in the impressions as they appear in lived experi-
ences but in the objects created by conceptual cognition in order 
to make those impressions intelligible. In both cases, the object is 
created on the basis of a law imposed by the facts themselves. The 
86 
two groups of sciences agree in that respect. Their difference de-
rives from the tendency or direction by which their object is formed. 
It lies in the procedures that constitute those groups. In the former 
group, a spiritual object emerges in the act of understanding; in 
the latter group, a physical object in the act of cognition. 
And we can use the words "human sciences" with a clear sense 
of what is meant. Ever since the eighteenth century, as the need 
arose of finding a common name for this group of sciences, they 
were designated as moral sciences, or as Geisteswissenschaften 
(human sciences), or finally as Kulturwissenschaften (cultural sci-
ences). This change of names alone shows that none of them is 
108 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
quite adequate to what is to be designated. At this point, I merely 
indicate my use of the term Geisteswissenschaften (human sci-
ences) and the way it refers to Geist (spirit). It is the same way in 
which Montesquieu spoke of the spirit of the laws, Hegel of objec-
tive spirit, and Ihering of the spirit of Roman law. To compare the 
usefulness of the concept of human sciences [and its reference to 
spirit] with that of the other concepts mentioned will be possible 
later. 
4 
Only now are we able to satisfy the last requirement for a proper 
definition of the human sciences. We can delimit the human sci-
ences from the natural sciences by means of certain clear proper-
ties. The object of the human sciences, in contrast to that of natu-
ral scientific cognition, refers to spirit as just discussed. From the 
perspective of perception and cognition, humanity would be for us 
a physical fact; and, as such, it would be accessible only to natural 
scientific cognition. But, as object of the human sciences, it emerges 
only insofar as human states are experienced, insofar as they come 
to expression in life-expressions, and insofar as these expressions 
are understood. This nexus of life, expression, and understanding 
embraces the gestures, looks, and words by which human beings 
communicate, the enduring spiritual creations in which the depths 
of the creative artist are revealed to the one who apprehends them, 
and the constant objectifications of spirit in social formations by 
means of which the community of human nature shines forth and 
is constantly intuitive and certain for us. The psychophysical life-
unit is familiar with itself by means of the same double relation-
ship of lived experience and understanding; it is reflexively aware 
87 
of itself in the present and finds itself again in memory as some-
thing past. But when it strives to hold onto its states and to com-
prehend them, when it directs attention to itself, the narrow limits 
of such an introspective method of self-cognition become appar-
ent. Only his deeds, his fixed life-expressions, and their effects 
upon others can instruct man about himself. Thus he can learn to 
recognize himself only by the detour of understanding. We experi-
ence what we once were, how we developed and became what we 
are, from how we acted, from what life-plans we once fashioned, 
from our professional activities, from old forgotten letters, from 
judgments about us that were uttered a long time ago. In brief, it 
is the process of understanding through which life obtains clarity 
DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
109 
about itself in its depths. On the other hand, we understand our-
selves and others only if we project our experienced life into every 
sort of expression of our own and others' lives. Thus the nexus of 
lived experience, expression, and understanding is everywhere the 
distinctive procedure by which humanity is present for us as an 
object of the human sciences. These sciences are founded upon 
this nexus of lived experience, expression, and understanding. 
Only here do we obtain a clear criterion by which the delimitation 
of the human sciences can become definitive. A discipline belongs 
to the human sciences only if its object is accessible to us through 
the attitude that is founded upon the nexus of life, expression, and 
understanding. 
This common core of the above sciences is the source of all 
those characteristics that have been enumerated in discussions 
concerning the essence of the human sciences, sciences of culture, 
or history. For example, it is the source of the special relationship 
in the human sciences between what is unique, singular, individ-
ual, and universal uniformities, and of the connection here among 
factual assertions, value judgments, and concepts of purposes. 7 Ac-
cordingly: "The apprehension of what is singular and individual is 
for them as much a final purpose as the explication of abstract 
uniformities. "R Another consequence is that all the leading con-
cepts with which this group of sciences operates are different from 
the corresponding concepts in the domain of the knowledge of 
nature. 
What justifies us in designating disciplines as human sciences is 
first and foremost their endeavor to relate human life, and the 
objective spirit realized by it, back to a creative, evaluative, and 
active source, something that expresses and objectifies itself. 
88 
II. DIFFERENT MoDES oF FoRMATION IN THE NATURAL 
SciENCES AND IN THE HuMAN SciENCES 
Historical Orientation 
I 
The formation of the historical world occurs in the human sciences. 
With this figurative expression, I designate the ideal system in 
7 See my Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW I, 78£. 
8 Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW I, 78. 
IIO 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
which the historical world is known objectively through a sequence 
of operations rooted in lived experience and understanding. 
What, then, is the connection of a theory of this sort with its 
most closely allied sciences? First, this ideal system of the human 
world and the historical knowledge of the actual process through 
which the human world has gradually become accessible mutually 
condition each other. They are distinct from each other, but they 
have their common object in the human world: That is the basis of 
their inner relation. The process by which the knowledge of this 
world has emerged provides a clue for the understanding of its 
ideal formation, and this formation makes possible a deeper un-
derstanding of the history of the human sciences. 
Such a theory will be based on insights into the structure of 
knowledge, the forms of thought, and scientific methods. We will 
discuss certain necessary logical issues, but a full treatment of 
logic would entangle our investigation in endless controversies 
right from the beginning. 
Finally, there is also a relation between this theory of the forma-
tion of [the historical world] in the human sciences and the cri-
tique of our cognitive capacity. The full significance of our subject-
matter becomes apparent only when one undertakes a clarification 
of this relation. Like logic, the critique of conceptual cognition is 
an analysis of the present system of sciences. In epistemology, 
analysis proceeds from this system back to the conditions that ren-
der science possible. But here we confront a relationship that is 
decisive for the development of epistemology and its present situa-
89 
tion. Epistemological analysis was first undertaken in relation to 
the natural sciences. For, in the progress of the sciences, it hap-
pened that the conceptual cognition of nature developed first. 
Only in the nineteenth century did the human sciences enter a 
stage that made it possible to utilize them for epistemology. For 
the time being, the study of the formation of these two classes of 
sciences must precede their foundation in an overall epistemology: 
it provides a preparation for a coherent epistemology both gener-
ally as well as in detail. It falls under the perspective of the prob-
lem of conceptual cognition and works toward its solution. 
2 
The modern European nations, having come of age through hu-
manism and the reformation, began to advance in the second half 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I I I 
of the sixteenth century from the stage of metaphysics and theol-
ogy to that of autonomous experiential sciences. This was a greater 
advance than the one in third-century B.C. Greece when mathe-
matics, mechanics, astronomy, and mathematical geography sim-
ilarly emancipated themselves from logic and metaphysics to form 
an interconnected system. In this formation of the natural sciences, 
induction and experiment did not yet achieve their true place and 
significance, and they did not yet emerge in their full fruitfulness. 
Only in the slave-free industrial and commercial cities of the mod-
ern nations as well as in the courts, academies, and universities of 
large military states in need of money did a goal-oriented interven-
tion in nature, mechanical work, discovery, invention, and experi-
mentation really become possible. As these operations were con-
nected with mathematical construction, genuine analysis of nature 
came about. Through the cooperation of Kepler, Galileo, Bacon, 
and Descartes in the first half of the seventeenth century, the math-
ematical science of nature was formed as the conceptual cognition 
of the order of nature according to laws. And still in the same 
century, it developed its full potential through a constantly grow-
ing number of scientists. Accordingly, epistemology at the end of 
the seventeenth century and in the eighteenth century, in Locke, 
Berkeley, Hume, d' Alembert, Lambert, and Kant, was almost ex-
clusively about this [lawfully ordered] nature. 
The formation of the natural sciences is determined by the way 
in which their object, nature, is given. Images emerge from a con-
tinual flux, they are referred to objects, these objects fill and oc-
cupy empirical consciousness, and they form the object of descrip-
90 
tive natural science. But even empirical consciousness notices that 
the sensory qualities exhibited in images are dependent upon the 
standpoint of observation, upon distance, and upon illumination. 
Physics and physiology show ever more clearly the phenomenality 
of these sensory qualities. Thus the task arises of thinking of ob-
jects in such a way that both their phenomenal changes and the 
uniformities emerging ever more clearly amidst these changes be-
come intelligible. The concepts through which this happens are auxil-
iary constructions that thought creates for this purpose. Thus nature 
as foreign to us, transcending the apprehending subject, is elabo-
rated by auxiliary constructions based on the phenomenally given. 
But at the same time, this way in which nature is given to us 
contains the means for subordinating it to thought and making it 
serve the tasks of life. The articulation of the senses occasions the 
comparability of impressions in every system of the sensory mani-
112 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
fold. The possibility of an analysis of nature is based on this. 
Sensory phenomena that are affiliated as part of specific spheres 
manifest regularities of succession or in the relations of what is si-
multaneous. By attributing unchangeable substrates of change to 
these regularities, it becomes possible to derive them from a lawful 
order in the conceived manifold of things. 
But the task can only be solved when a further characteristic of 
the given is added to the phenomenal regularities established by 
induction and experimentation. Everything physical has a magni-
tude: It can be counted; it is extended in time; for the most part it 
also fills a space and can be measured; measurable movements can 
then be discerned in the spatial, and if audible phenomena do not 
include spatial extension and motion, they can nevertheless be at-
tributed to them. The connection of strong sound-impressions 
with the perception of vibrations of the air suggests such an attri-
bution. Thus mathematical and mechanical constructions become 
the means of hypothetically deriving all sensory phenomena from 
motions of unchangeable substrates according to unchangeable 
laws. Expressions such as "substrate of change," "something," 
"fact," "substance," designate mere logical subjects transcending 
conceptual cognition, of which lawful, mathematical, and me-
chanical relations are predicated. They are mere limit concepts, 
something that makes natural scientific assertions possible, a point 
of departure for such assertions. 
91 
There is another factor determining the structure and the forma-
tion of the natural sciences. Space and number are given in nature 
as conditions of qualitative determinations, and motion becomes 
the general condition for the rearrangement of parts and the vibra-
tions of air or ether that chemistry and physics attribute to changes. 
The systematic relations between the sciences in the conceptual 
cognition of nature are a consequence of these relationships. Each 
of these sciences has its presuppositions in the preceding one; but 
it comes into existence when these presuppositions are applied to 
a new region of facts and of the relations involved in them. As far 
as I know, this natural order of the sciences was first established 
by Hobbes. The objects of natural science- Hobbes obviously 
goes further and also includes the human sciences in this order-
are according to him bodies, their most fundamental properties 
are the relations of space and number as established by mathemat-
ics. Mechanics depends upon them, and when light, color, sound, 
and heat are explained in terms of the motions of the smallest 
parts of matter, physics emerges. That is the schema that was de-
veloped in accordance with the further course of scientific work 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I I 3 
and was related to the history of the sciences by Comte. The more 
mathematics disclosed the boundless region of free formations, the 
more it surpassed the limits of its next task of grounding the natu-
ral sciences. But that did not change what is true of the objects 
themselves, namely, that the laws of spatial and numerical magni-
tudes contain the presuppositions of mechanics. Further advances 
in mathematics merely expanded the possibilities of derivation. 
The same relationship exists between mechanics and physics and 
chemistry. Then when the living body appears as a new complex 
of facts, its study has its foundation in the truths of chemistry and 
physics. Everywhere [we see] the same stratified formation of the 
natural sciences. Each of these strata forms a self-enclosed do-
main, and at the same time each is supported and conditioned by 
the stratum underlying it. From biology on down, every natural 
science contains the lawful relationships that the strata of sciences 
under it display, all the way down to the most general mathemati-
cal foundation. Moving upwards, something that was not con-
tained in the preceding or lower scientific stratum emerges in every 
higher stratum as a further or new fact. 
Distinct from the group of natural sciences in which natural 
92 
laws are recognized is another group of natural sciences that de-
scribes the world in its structure as a singular process, establishes 
its evolution in the course of time, and applies the laws of nature 
acquired by the first group to explain its composition under the 
presupposition of an original arrangement. To the extent that they 
go beyond the establishment, the mathematical determination, and 
the description of the factual order and the historical course [of 
nature], they rest upon the first group. Thus here too the investiga-
tion of nature is dependent upon the formation of the conceptual 
cognition of laws of nature. 
Because epistemology had its primary and chief object in this 
formation of the natural sciences, a complex of problems arose. 
The thinking subject and the sensory objects standing before it are 
separated from each other; the sensory objects have a phenomenal 
character, and as long as epistemology remains in the region of the 
knowledge of nature, it can never overcome this phenomenality of 
the reality that stands over against it. In the order of laws attrib-
uted to these sensory phenomena by the natural sciences, sensory 
qualities are re-presented by forms of motion that refer to these 
qualities. And even when the sensory facts, with whose acceptance 
and re-presentation the knowledge of nature began, become ob-
jects of comparative physiology, still no developmental investiga-
tion can make intelligible how one of these sensory functions 
114 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
changes over into another. One can of course postulate the trans-
formation of a dermal sensation into a sensation of sound or 
color, but one can by no means imagine it. There is no under-
standing of this world, and we can transfer value, meaning, sense 
into it only by analogy with ourselves, and only from that point 
where psychic life begins to stir in the organic world. In light of 
this formation of the natural sciences, the definitions and axioms 
that form their foundation, the necessity peculiar to them, and the 
law of causality have acquired a special meaning for epistemology. 
And since the formation of the natural sciences permitted a two-
fold interpretation, two directions of epistemology (each of which 
allowed further possibilities to be pursued) developed from that 
twofold interpretation, prepared by epistemological tendencies of 
the Middle Ages. 
In one of these directions, the axioms upon which this forma-
tion was grounded were combined with a logic that based the cor-
rect system of thought upon formulas that had attained the high-
93 
est degree of abstraction from the matter of thought. Laws and 
forms of thought, these extreme abstractions, were apprehended 
as grounding the system of knowledge. Leibniz's formulation of 
the principle of sufficient reason lay in this direction. And when 
Kant gathered the entire content of mathematics and logic and 
sought the conditions for them in consciousness, his theory of the 
a priori emerged. This background of his theory of the a priori 
shows as clearly as possible that it designates above all a ground-
ing relationship. Outstanding logicians such as Schleiermacher, 
Lotze, and Sigwart have simplified and transformed this perspec-
tive, although quite different attempts at a solution appear in their 
works. 
The other direction has its common point of departure in the 
uniformities displayed by induction and experimentation, and in 
the predictions and applications grounded on them. Within this 
direction again quite different possibilities were developed by 
Avenarius, Mach, the pragmatists, and Poincare, especially in con-
ceiving the mathematical and mechanical foundations of knowl-
edge. Consequently, this direction of epistemology also fragmented 
into a multiplicity of hypothetical assumptions. 
3 
Just as the natural sciences were constituted in a rapid develop-
ment in the first half of the seventeenth century, so it was also a 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I I 5 
comparatively short period, encompassing the contributions of 
Wolf/ Humboldt, Niebuhr,
10 Eichhorn,
11 Savigny, 12 Hegel and 
Schleiermacher, Bopp, 13 and Jacob Grimm, that was decisive for 
the foundation of the human sciences. We must attempt to com-
prehend the inner coherence of this movement. Its great meth-
odological achievement consisted in founding the human sciences 
upon socio-historical facts. That made possible a new organ-
ization for the human sciences, in which philology, criticism, and 
historiography, the execution of the comparative method in the 
systematic human sciences, and the application of the idea of de-
velopment to all domains of the spiritual world were placed into 
an inner relationship to one another for the first time. Thereby, the 
problem of the human sciences entered a new stage; and every step 
that has been or still needs to be taken toward the resolution of 
this problem requires an immersion in this new factual system of 
the human sciences. It provides the framework within which all 
later human scientific achievements fall, up to the present day. 
This development that will now be recounted was prepared for 
by the eighteenth century. A universal-historical conception of in-
94 
dividual parts of history originated at that time. The natural sci-
ences generated the leading ideas of the Enlightenment, which 
brought a scientifically grounded coherence to the historical pro-
cess for the first time: the ideas of a solidarity of nations despite 
their power struggles, and of their common progress, grounded in 
the universal validity of scientific truths. According to this idea of 
progress, scientific truths constantly increase and build in layers 
upon one another, leading to the growing dominion of the human 
spirit over the earth by means of such conceptual cognition. The 
great monarchies of Europe were regarded as the stable carriers of 
"Friedrich August Wolf (1759-1824), a classical philologist, especially influen-
tial through his Prolegomena ad Homerum (1796), which concerns the origins of 
Homeric poetry. See also his Vorlesungen iiber die Altertumswissenschaft ( 5 vols., 
1831-35), where he develops a broad, comprehensive view of the nature of classi-
cal studies. 
10 Barthold Georg Niebuhr (1776-183J), German historian. His influential 
work, Romische Geschichte, began a new era of historiography based on scientific 
historical scholarship. 
11 Johann Gottfried Eichhorn (1752-1827), German Protestant theologian, ori-
entalist, and historian. 
12 Friedrich Karl von Savigny (1779-1861), German jurist; a founder of the his-
torical school of jurisprudence who influenced the modern study of medieval law 
with his Geschichte des romischen Rechts im Mittelalter (1815-31). 
13 Franz B. Bopp (1791-r867), founder of comparative linguistics in Germany 
and Sanskrit scholar. 
I 16 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
this progress. Then, when industry, commerce, wealth, civilization, 
together with the sciences, were seen to develop on their founda-
tion, this complex of advances was summed up under the concept 
of culture. The development of this culture was followed out, its 
eras were depicted, and cross sections were taken of them, specific 
aspects were subjected to separate studies and related to one an-
other in the totality of each era. Voltaire, Hume, and Gibbon were 
the typical representatives of this view. And even though the indi-
vidual aspects of culture were assumed to instantiate rules, rules 
that would be derivable from their rational construction, it gradu-
ally prepared the way for a historical comprehension of the re-
gions of culture. 
Once the Enlightenment thought of every part of culture as de-
termined by a purpose and as subordinated to rules to which the 
attainment of this purpose was bound, it went on to see in past 
epochs the realization of their rules. Arnold, 14 Semler, 15 Bohmer, 16 
and the school of church law, as well as Lessing, explored primi-
tive Christianity and its constitution as the true type of Christian 
religiosity and its external orders. Winckelmann and Lessing found 
their regulative ideal of art and poetry realized in Greece. Behind 
the study of the moral person bound by the duty of perfection, 
man in his irrational and individual reality could emerge more 
fully in psychology and poetry. On the one hand, the Enlighten-
ment idea of progress posited a rationally definable goal; this idea 
did not allow the earlier stages of this path to be appreciated for 
their own distinctive content and value; the goal of government 
was established by Schlozer17 as the formation of great states with 
centralized and intensive management, the cultivation of welfare 
and culture, and by Kant as the peaceful community of states real-
95 
izing justice; in the same vein, limited by the ideals of the time and 
14 Gottfried Arnold (1666-I7I4), Lutheran theologian and church historian. His 
work Unparteische Kirchen-und Ketzerhistorie is an "impartial history," based on 
his extensive knowledge of the original writings of heretics and separatists of every 
period of church history, rather than on the accounts of orthodox writers. 
''Johann Saloma Semler (1725-91), German Lutheran theologian and a fore-
runner in scientific biblical textual criticism; author of Abhandlung von der freien 
Untersuchung des Kanons. 
16 Johann Friedrich Bohmer (1795-1863), German historian and compiler of the 
six-volume Regesta imperii, an annotated collection of imperial German docu-
ments starting from A.D. 9 I I. 
17 August Ludwig von Schlozer (1735-I809), German historian, whose chief 
works include Vorstellung seiner Universalhistorie and Vorbereitung zur Welt-
geschichte fur Kinder. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
II7 
natural theology, Winckelmann and Lessing also prescribed finite 
rational goals for other great cultural forces. On the other hand, it 
was Herder, by acknowledging the independent value that each 
nation and each of its periods actualize, who revolutionized this 
historiography that had been guided by an intellectual concept of 
purpose. Accordingly, the eighteenth century stood at the thresh-
old of a new age for the human sciences. The path to the great age 
in which the human sciences claimed their place next to the natu-
ral sciences leads from Voltaire and Montesquieu, Hume and Gib-
bon, through Kant, Herder, and Fichte. 
Germany was the arena for this constitution of a second system 
of sciences. This land of the center, of inner culture, had preserved 
effectively within itself, from the Reformation on, the powers of 
the European past, Greek culture, Roman law, and original Chris-
tianity. How they were epitomized in "Germany's teacher," Mel-
anchthon! Thus the fullest and most natural understanding of 
these powers could develop on German ground. The period in 
which that happened had disclosed in poetry, music, and philoso-
phy depths of life to which no nation had previously penetrated. 
Such a flourishing of cultural life evokes a greater intensity and 
multiplicity of lived experience in historical thinkers and an in-
creased power of understanding the most diversified forms of exis-
tence. Romanticism especially, with which the new human science 
was so closely allied, particularly the two Schlegels and Novalis, 
cultivated together with a new freedom of life also that of immer-
sion in everything foreign. The Schlegels expanded the horizon of 
enjoyment and understanding to encompass the full multiplicity of 
creations in language and literature. They created a new compre-
hension of literary works through the study of their inner form. 
And this idea of inner form, of composition, was the basis for 
Schleiermacher's reconstruction of the system of Plato's works and 
later for the understanding that he was the first to gain of the 
inner form of the Pauline epistles. This strict view of form also 
provided a new instrument for historical criticism. And it was pre-
cisely on this basis that Schleiermacher discussed the processes of 
literary production and understanding in his hermeneutics and 
that Boeckh 13 developed them further in his encyclopedia- a pro-
cedure that was of the greatest importance for the development of 
methodology. 
1g August Boeckh (r78s-r867), German classical philologist. His Enzyklopiidie 
includes his famous lectures on hermeneutics. 
I 18 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
W. von Humboldt is situated in the midst of the Romantics. He 
9 6 
was different from them in the Kantian composure and resolute-
ness of his personality, yet was akin to them in a capacity to enjoy 
and understand every kind of life, in a philology based on this, 
and in an experimentation with the new problems of the human 
sciences whose approach was just as systematic as Friedrich Schle-
gel's project of an encyclopedia. F. A. Wolf, who showed an intel-
lectual affinity with W. von Humboldt, proposed a new ideal for 
philology, in accordance with which it, while firmly grounded in 
language, would encompass the entire culture of a nation in order 
to attain on this basis an understanding of its greatest cultural 
creations. Niebuhr and Mommsen, Boeckh and Otfried Muller, 19 
Jacob Grimm and Miillenhoff20 were philologists in that sense, and 
an infinite blessing for the sciences of history issued from their 
rigorous concept [of philology]. Here we see the origin of a me-
thodologically grounded historical cognition of the full life of indi-
vidual nations and an understanding of their place in history, from 
which the idea of nationality developed. 
From this approach, the study of the earliest available periods 
of individual peoples first attained its true significance. The Histor-
ical School discovered the creative power [of a people J at work in 
religion, custom, and law, and derived this power from the com-
mon spirit active in the communal creations of those early times 
when political institutions were smaller and individuals more uni-
form. These discoveries conditioned their entire conception of the 
development of nations. 
And for such times filled with myth and saga, historical criti-
cism was the necessary supplement to understanding. Here too 
F. A. Wolf was the leader. When he investigated the Homeric 
poems, he arrived at the assumption that the epic poetry of the 
Greeks before the Iliad and Odyssey had arisen from oral recita-
tion, and thus arose from smaller forms. This initiated an analyti-
cal mode of criticism of national epic poetry. Niebuhr proceeded 
further in the tracks of Wolf, from the criticism of tradition to the 
reconstruction of the most ancient Roman history. In addition to 
the above assumption of Homeric criticism, Niebuhr adopted, as a 
further principle for the clarification of tradition, the assumptions 
'
9 Karl Otfried Muller (1797-I84o), classical scholar and professor in 
Gottingen. 
2° Karl Miillenhoff (r8r8-84), German philologist; author of works on German 
philology and antiquities. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I I 9 
that reporters of events are partisan in nature and that later times 
are unable to understand older constitutional relationships. Chris-
tian Baur, the great critic of Christian tradition, then made the 
most fruitful use of this principle of clarification. Niebuhr's criti-
cism was most closely connected with the new development of 
Roman history. 
Niebuhr understood ancient Roman times by way of a basic 
97 
intuition of a communal national spirit that works through cus-
tom, law, and the poetic tradition of history to produce the spe-
cific structure of a particular people. And here too the influence of 
life upon the science of history made itself felt. Added to the phil-
ological instruments were his familiarity, acquired in important 
positions, with the economy, law, and government life, and the 
comparison of analogous developments. Savigny's intuition of the 
history of law, which found its strongest expression in his doctrine 
of common law, issued from the same intuitions. "All law origi-
nates in the mode that the prevailing linguistic usage designates as 
common law." "It is produced first by custom and popular belief, 
then by jurisprudence; thus everywhere by inner, silently working 
powers, not by the will of a legislator. "
21 Jacob Grimm's great con-
ceptions of the development of the German spirit in language, law, 
and religion were also in agreement with these intuitions. This 
became the basis for a further discovery made in this epoch. 
In the spirit of the Enlightenment, the natural system of the hu-
man sciences saw in religion, law, morality, and art an advance 
from barbaric anarchy to a rational purposive system that is 
grounded in human nature. For according to this system, lawful 
relationships that can be explicated in fixed concepts are con-
tained in human nature. And they produce the same basic lines of 
economic life, of legal order, of moral law, of rational belief, and 
of aesthetic rules everywhere and uniformly. To the extent that 
humanity brings them to consciousness and strives to subordinate 
its life to them in economy, law, religion, and art, it comes of age 
and becomes ever more capable of guiding the progress of society 
by scientific insight. But what had succeeded in the natural sci-
ences- the establishment of a universally valid system of con-
cepts- would turn out to be impossible in the human sciences. 
The different nature of the subject-matter of the two regions of 
21 Friedrich Carl von Savigny (1779-r86r), "Entstehung des positiven Rechts," 
in Vom Beruf unserer Zeit fiir Gesetzgebung und Rechtswissenschaft, 2nd ed. 
(Heidelberg, r84o; reprinted Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1967), p. r3f. 
I20 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
knowledge became evident. Thus this natural system destroyed it-
self by splintering into various directions that, to be sure, had the 
same scientific foundation- or the same lack of one. In its conflict 
with the conceptual system of the eighteenth century, the great 
epoch of the human sciences established as evident the historical 
character of the sciences of economy, law, religion, and art. They 
develop from the creative power of nations. 
In this way, a new intuition of history came to prominence. 
98 
Schleiermacher's Reden22 first recognized the significance of com-
munal consciousness and how it is expressed in religious com-
munication. His conception of primitive Christianity, his Gospel 
criticism, and his discovery of the religious subject, of the role of 
religious assertions and of dogma in communal consciousness, so 
distinctive of the standpoint of his theory of faith, all rest on this 
recognition. We now know23 how Hegel's concept of history, 
whose advance makes possible development in history, arose un-
der the influence of Schleiermacher's Reden. Not without some 
influence from such philosophical concepts, the Historical School 
arrived at a similar result in going back to the past of a people and 
finding there a creative common spirit that produces a national 
treasury of custom, law, myth, epic poetry, which then determines 
the entire development of a nation. Language, custom, constitu-
tion, law, according to Savigny's basic intuition, "have no isolated 
existence, they are only individual powers and activities of one 
people, united inseparably in nature. " 24 "What binds them into 
one whole is the common conviction of a people." "This youthful 
time of the peoples is poor in concepts, but it enjoys a clear con-
sciousness of its states and relationships, it feels them and lives 
through them fully and completely." This "clear, natural state is 
also well preserved in civil law," as embodied in "symbolic deeds 
where legal relationships may arise or perish." "Their importance 
and their dignity correspond to the significance of the legal rela-
tionships themselves." They provide "the proper grammar of law 
in this period." The development of law occurs in an organic pro-
cess; "as culture develops, all the activities of the people are in-
creasingly differentiated, and what would otherwise be carried out 
by the community, now becomes the responsibility of particular 
22 Friedrich Schleiermacher, Reden iiber die Religion (Braunschweig: Schweschte, 
I879). (D) 
2 ; See my Jugendgeschichte Hegels, GS IV, r-187. (D) 
24 Savigny, "Entstehung," p. 8. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
121 
professions. " 25 The separate profession of jurists emerges and re-
presents the people in its legal functions. Conceptualization now 
becomes the tool for the development of the law. It grasps the 
guiding principles or determinations from which the others are 
derived. The scientific character of jurisprudence rests upon their 
discovery, and jurisprudence becomes more and more the founda-
tion of the further development of the law by legislation. Jacob 
Grimm demonstrated an analogous organic development in lan-
guage. These approaches enabled the study of nations and of the 
99 
various aspects of their life to advance in a coherent way. 
A very significant advance in methodology accompanied this 
great perspective of the Historical School. Since the time of Aris-
totle's school, the development of the comparative method in the 
biology of plants and animals had provided the point of departure 
for its application in the human sciences. Ancient political science 
had been raised by this method to the most highly developed disci-
pline of the human sciences in antiquity. Inasmuch as the Histori-
cal School repudiated the derivation of universal truths in the hu-
man sciences from abstract constructive thought, the comparative 
method became for it the only procedure by which to ascend to 
truths of greater universality. It applied this procedure to lan-
guage, myth, and national epics; and the comparison of Roman 
law with German law, which was flourishing at the time, became 
the point of departure for the development of the comparative 
method in the domain of law in general. Here too we can point to 
an interesting relationship with the contemporary state of biology. 
Cuvier took as his point of departure the concept of the combina-
tion of parts in a zoological type, and that concept allowed the 
construction of the form of extinct animals on the basis of their 
remains. Niebuhr adapted an analogous procedure, and Franz 
Bopp and Jacob Grimm applied the comparative method to lan-
guage, entirely in the spirit of the great biologists. Earlier attempts 
by Humboldt to penetrate the inner form of nations was finally 
realized by means of the comparative study of language. Then, in 
France, de Tocqueville, the great analyst of political life, joined in 
this direction. On the model of Aristotle, he traced the functions, 
coherence, and development of political bodies. A common per-
spective, which I would call "morphological," pervades all these 
generalizations, and leads to concepts of new depth. From this 
2' Savigny, "Entstehung," pp. 2ff. 
I22 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
standpoint, universal truths do not constitute the foundation of 
the human sciences, but their final result. 
The limit of the Historical School lay in its inability to develop 
any relation to universal history. Johannes von Miiller's26 general 
history, which relied on Herder's incomplete Ideas to do so, dem-
onstrated the utter inadequacy of the available means to solve this 
problem. Here Hegel, who was active at the same time as the 
Historical School, and at the same place where it was centered, 
intervened. 
1oo 
Hegel was one of the greatest historical geniuses of all time. He 
gathered the great productive forces of the historical world into 
the calm depths of his being. His intuitions were nourished by the 
history of the religious spirit. The Historical School had demanded 
a strict philological approach, and had applied the comparative 
method; Hegel adopted quite a different approach. Under the in-
fluence of his own religious-metaphysical experiences, in constant 
interaction with the sources but always going back from them to 
the deepest religious inwardness, he discovered a development of 
religiosity in which a lower stage of the common religious con-
sciousness brings about, by forces that are active in it, a higher 
stage that from then on contains the lower stage. The eighteenth 
century had looked for the progress of humanity in the increasing 
conceptual cognition of nature and in the resulting mastery over 
it; Hegel grasped the development of inner religiosity. The eigh-
teenth century saw the solidarity of the human race in the progress 
of the sciences; Hegel discovered in religiosity a collective con-
sciousness as the subject of development. The concepts used in the 
eighteenth century to grasp the history of humanity referred to 
happiness, perfection, and the rational calculation aimed at realiz-
ing these goals; Hegel agreed with their intention of expressing the 
various aspects of human existence by means of a universally valid 
system of concepts, but he was no less effective than the Historical 
School in rejecting the intellectualist conception of human-historical 
reality. The conceptual system sought by him would not formulate 
and regulate the various aspects of life abstractly. He strove for a 
new complex of concepts that could comprehend development in 
its entire scope. He broadened his approach beyond religious de-
velopment to that of metaphysics and from there to all areas of 
life. Thus the entire realm of history became his object. Every-
2" Johannes von Muller (1752-1809), Swiss historian; author of Geschichten 
Schweizerischer Eidgenossenschaft and 24 Bucher a/lgemeiner Geschichten. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
123 
where, he discerned activity and advancement, which consisted es-
sentially at every point in relations between concepts. Thus the 
science of history passed over into philosophy. This transforma-
tion was possible because of the way that German speculative phi-
losophy was then approaching problems of the human spirit. Kant's 
analysis had probed the depths of consciousness to discover forms 
of intelligence such as sensory intuition, categories, schemata of 
the pure concepts of understanding, concepts of reflection, theo-
retical ideas of reason, the moral law, and the power of judgment, 
and he had determined their structure. Each of these forms of in-
telligence is essentially an activity. But this only became fully evi-
dent when Fichte allowed the world of consciousness to emerge 
ror 
from acts of positing, counterpositing, and synthetic comprehen-
sion- discerning energy and progression everywhere. Since history 
is realized in consciousness, Hegel claims that the same coopera-
tion of activities that makes development possible in positing, 
counterpositing, and in the higher unity of a superindividual sub-
ject must be found again in history. That formed the foundation 
for Hegel's task of explicating the shapes of consciousness in con-
cepts and of comprehending the development of spirit through 
them as a system of conceptual relations. A higher logic than that 
of the understanding was to make this development comprehen-
sible: it was the most difficult work of his life. The guiding thread 
for the sequence of the categories he took from Kant, the great 
discoverer of the various orders of relations or, as one could say, 
of the structural forms of knowledge. According to Hegel, the re-
alization of this system of ideas in actuality had its culmination in 
world history. Thus he intellectualized the historical world. In op-
position to the Historical School, he found the universally valid 
grounds for the systematic science of spirit in the system of reason 
that spirit actualized. Moreover, by means of this higher logic, he 
subordinated to the system of reason everything that the rational-
ism of the eighteenth century excluded from its rational system as 
individual existence, particular form of life, chance, and arbitrariness. 
Ranke's understanding of the historical world issued from the 
cooperation of all these moments. 
He was a great artist. His intuition of the "unknown history of 
the world" grew up in him quietly, steadily, without struggle. 
Goethe's contemplative life-mood and its artistic perspective on 
the world were extended by Ranke to history. Thus he wants only 
to present what has been. With complete fidelity and with the per-
fected technique of criticism that he owes to Niebuhr, he brings to 
124 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
expression what is contained in the archives and in the literature. 
Artist by nature, he felt no need to go back to a system of the 
historical factors operative beneath the events, as the great schol-
ars of the Historical School had done. Unlike Niebuhr, he was 
afraid of losing in such depths not only his certainty but also his 
joy in the multiplicity of phenomena that are visible in broad day-
light. Ranke stopped short of analysis and conceptual thought 
concerning the connections that work together in history. That is 
the limit of his historiography. He was even less pleased with the 
ro2 
colorless conceptual order of the historical categories in Hegel's 
conception of the historical world. "What has more truth," he 
asked, "what leads us closer to the recognition of essential being, 
the pursuit of speculative thoughts or taking hold of the condi-
tions of humanity from which our innate way of thinking always 
emerges? I am for the latter because it is less subject to error." 
That is the first new trait in Ranke: he was the first to fully express 
the view that the foundation of all historical knowledge and its 
highest goal is the narrative presentation of the singular nexus of 
history- one goal at least: for Ranke was limited in that he saw 
his goal exclusively in this one- without condemning other goals. 
Here he departed from other historical approaches. 
With his poetic attitude toward the historical world, he was 
able to feel most keenly and bring out a sense of fate, the tragedy 
of life, all the splendor of the world, and the great self-confidence 
of men of action. In this interweaving of history with the con-
sciousness of life peculiar to poetry, he resembled Herodotus, his 
own model Thucydides, Johannes Muller, and Carlyle. Viewing 
life as if from a high place that allows it to be fully surveyed was 
necessarily connected in this being so akin to Goethe with a con-
ception of history based on a standpoint comprehending it in its 
entirety. His horizon was universal history; he grasped every ob-
ject from that point of view. In that respect, he was in agreement 
with the whole development of historiography from Voltaire to 
Hegel and Niebuhr. But his own peculiar contribution to this con-
sisted in the manner in which he attained new insights into the 
relations between political power, the inner development of the 
state, and higher culture, on the basis of how nations worked to-
gether and against one another. This universal historical point of 
view goes far back into his youth; he once spoke of an "old inten-
tion to discover the story of the history of the world, that course 
of events and developments of our race that is to be regarded as its 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
125 
distinctive content, its core, and its essence. " 27 Universal history 
was the favorite topic of his lectures; the connectedness of his indi-
vidual works was always present to him, and it was also the object 
of his last work, undertaken when he was over eighty years old. 
The artist in him desired to narrate the sensory breadth of events. 
He could do that only by bringing his universal historical point of 
view to bear on some particular object. His choice of such an 
object was decided not only by the interest with which the reports 
of the Venetian embassies captivated him but also by his sense for 
103 
what is open to the light of day and an innate sympathy with an 
epoch filled with the power struggles of great states and important 
sovereigns. "Gradually, a history of the most important moments 
of modern times composed itself for me, almost without my assis-
tance; to bring it to evidence and to write it will be my life's call-
ing." Thus the formation of modern states, their power struggles, 
and the effect thereof on their inner conditions became the object 
of his narrative art and led to a series of national histories. 
An incomparable will and capacity to be historically objective 
expressed itself in those works. The universal sympathy for histor-
ical values, the joy in the multiplicity of historical phenomena, the 
versatile receptivity for all of life already found in Herder and that 
rendered Johannes Muller's receptive spirit almost powerless in 
the face of historical forces- this most special talent of the Ger-
man spirit filled Ranke completely. Although his work was not 
without Hegel's influence, it was mostly in opposition to him. For 
he developed all kinds of purely historical means of bringing an 
infinite wealth of events into an objective historical nexus without 
appealing to a philosophical construction of history. In that way, 
the most distinctive feature of his historiography discloses itself to 
us. It wants to grasp reality as it is. That sense of reality that alone 
can create a formation of the historical world in the human sci-
ences filled him. In opposition to the demand often put to histo-
rians to act directly upon life by taking a stance in its battles, no 
one represented the character of history as an objective science so 
successfully as Ranke. We can exercise a true influence on the 
present only when we at first disregard it and raise ourselves to the 
level of a free objective science. In Ranke, that goal also led him to 
27 Leopold von Ranke, Letter to Heinrich Ranke, November 24, 1826, in Neue 
Briefe, ed. by Bernard Hoeft and Hans Herzfeld (Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe 
Verlag, 1949), p. 90. 
126 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
develop all the means of criticism. That the spirit of Niebuhr lived 
on in him is best illustrated in the critical supplement to his first 
major work. 
In addition to Ranke, two other great historians of the time 
opened up new insights into the formation of the historical world. 
Carlyle shows the same irresistible will to penetrate into reality 
in another way. He seeks the historical man- the hero. If Ranke is 
all eye, living in the world of objects, Carlyle's historiography rests 
upon his struggle with the problem of inner life. Thus these two 
complement each other, like the two directions of poetry, of which 
ro4 
one starts with objects and the other with the development of 
one's own essence. Carlyle projects into history the battle that he 
had waged in himself. His autobiographical philosophical novel is 
therefore the key to his historiography. His one-sided and quite 
singular genius is of an intuitive sort. According to him, every-
thing great springs from the unifying and organizing powers of 
faith and work. They create the external forms of society in 
economic life, law, and government. Those epochs in which these 
unifying powers assert themselves independently and straightfor-
wardly he terms positive eras- a designation in which the physi-
ocrats had anticipated him. After the positive eras have produced 
a stable stock of institutions on the foundation of faith, advancing 
thought dissolves this positive content, and negative times are 
launched. The affinity of this basic intuition with the German His-
torical School and Schelling's philosophy of history is unmistak-
able. But Carlyle's intuitive spirit develops its greatest power only 
in the application of these thoughts to his conception of great his-
torical men- the shapers of life and society on the basis of faith. 
He reads into their souls more deeply than anyone before him: he 
pictures to himself the interiority of their will in every one of their 
gestures and facial expressions, and in the intonation of their 
speech. The poet or thinker, the politician or religious genius, is 
not understandable on the basis of particular talents but only on 
the basis of the simple power to unite and control human beings 
by a faith. Fichte's influence upon him speaks clearly in all of this. 
Tocqueville was the third original historical mind of Ranke's 
time. He was the analyst among the historical scholars of the time, 
and of all analysts of the political world, the greatest since Aris-
,totle and Machiavelli. If Ranke and his school exploited the ar-
chives with meticulous thoroughness in order to grasp the net-
work of diplomatic relations embracing all of Europe in modern 
times, the archives were used for a new purpose by Tocqueville. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I27 
He examined them for those conditions that are significant for the 
understanding of the inner political structure of nations. His anal-
ysis was directed at the cooperation of functions in a modern po-
litical body, and he was the first to use, with the precision and 
meticulousness of a dissecting anatomist, every part of political 
life that was preserved in literature, the archives, and in life itself, 
for the study of those inner and enduring structural relationships. 
He provided the first real analysis of American democracy. The 
recognition that there exists a "movement," a "continuous, irre-
ro5 
sistible tendency" to produce a democratic order in all states, 
dawned on him from the development of society in various states. 
This recognition of his has since been confirmed by events in all 
parts of the world. As a genuine historical and political mind, he 
saw in this tendency of society neither progress nor something 
harmful in every respect. The art of politics must reckon with it 
and the political order specific to each country must be adjusted to 
this social tendency. And in his other book, Tocqueville was the 
first to penetrate the real relation between the political order of 
France in the eighteenth century and the revolution. This kind of 
political science also allowed applications to political praxis. Espe-
cially fruitful was his adaption of Aristotle's thesis that the healthy 
constitution of every state rests upon the proper relationship of 
achievements and rights, and that to pervert this relationship by 
transforming rights into privileges is to necessarily bring about its 
disintegration. Another important application of his analyses to 
praxis consisted in the recognition of the dangers of exaggerated 
centralization and in an insight into the blessings of independence 
and self-government. Thus he derived fruitful generalizations from 
history itself, and accordingly, a new, more basic relationship to 
the present arose from a new analysis of past realities. 
The whole sequence that I have described could be said to con-
stitute the rise of historical consciousness. It conceives all phenom-
ena of the human world as products of historical development. 
Under its influence the systematic human sciences were grounded 
on developmental history and on comparative procedures. When 
Hegel made the idea of development the central theme of the hu-
man sciences, which were in turn subsumed under the schema of 
progress in time, he was able to connect the retrospective study of 
the past with our advance into the future, into the ideal. History 
achieved a new dignity. This emerging historical consciousness 
was expanded by important historians to encompass ever new do-
mains and ever new problems right up to the present, and it trans-
128 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
formed the sciences of society. This significant development in 
which the tendency to attain increasingly pure and strict objective 
knowledge of the human world in the social sciences as well as in 
history comes into conflict with the domain of political and social 
ro6 
strivings needs no comment here, since that is among the problems 
of the following investigations themselves. 
Theory is supposed to present in concepts and ground epistemo-
logically the system of human sciences that has thus arisen. And if 
one begins with Ranke and links the Historical School to him, 
then a second problem arises. In his great historical works, Ranke 
locates the sense, meaning, and value of eras and nations in them-
selves. They are, as it were, centered in themselves. In those 
works, historical reality is never measured by an unconditional 
value or purpose or by a basic idea. And if one then asks about 
the inner relationship that makes that centering of history in itself 
possible when we move from individual, to commonality to com-
munities, then this is where the studies of the Historical School 
become relevant. This kind of historical thinking itself needs to be 
grounded epistemologically and clarified by concepts, without be-
ing transformed into something transcendental or metaphysical by 
a relation to the unconditioned or absolute. 
4 
Thus from the end of the eighteenth century until the second half 
of the nineteenth, the human sciences, emanating from Germany, 
gradually reached the stage whereby an access to their logical and 
epistemological problems became possible through establishing 
the true system of their tasks. The historical world as their unitary 
object and historical consciousness as a unitary relationship to it 
had now emerged. All further advances in the human sciences, as 
important as they were, only expanded that nexus that had been 
gradually instituted from the time of the Enlightenment on, which 
situated every individual historical study under the standpoint of 
universal history, grounded the human sciences upon this kind of 
history, and connected philology, criticism, historiography, com-
parative methods, and developmental history into one whole. 
Thus history became philosophical; it acquired a new dignity and 
significance through Voltaire, Montesquieu, Kant, Herder, Schiller, 
and Hegel; and through the Historical School, reflection upon it 
attained its foundation in the great nexus just presented. The the-
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
129 
ory of history is the effort to apply the insight of the Historical 
School slowly and gradually to that nexus, and we are still in the 
midst of executing that task. But no matter what positions were 
taken up in that course, they were all oriented to the great fact of 
the new formation of the human sciences. 
In modern times, writings on the study of history always accom-
ro7 
panied the development of historiography, and their number grew 
steadily during the period of Enlightenment in the various nations 
of our culture. Especially since the end of the seventeenth century, 
the battle of skepticism against all kinds of knowledge began. It 
was directed also against the historical tradition, and that in turn 
evoked strong impulses toward the consideration of method. In 
addition to inspiring works on the foundation of historical knowl-
edge, encyclopedias of historical science claimed recognition in 
university life. But what a distance there is even between Wachs-
muth's28 attempt at a theory of history, which appeared in I82o at 
the height of the new historiography, and Humboldt's essay29 of 
the same time, which was affected by the spirit of the new histo-
riography. There is a sharp division here. 
The new theory of history naturally had its two points of depar-
ture in German philosophical idealism and in the transformation 
of historical science. Let us begin with the former. 
Kant had addressed the problem how a unitary nexus, "a regu-
lar path," could be discovered in the course of history. He did not 
ask from the epistemological standpoint about the conditions of 
the nexus available through existing science; rather, his question 
concerned how principles for conceptualizing historical material 
could be derived a priori from the moral law to which all action is 
subject. The course of history is a part of the great system of na-
ture; but beginning with the emergence of the organic, that system 
cannot be known in terms of causal laws, but is accessible only to 
the teleological point of view. Thus Kant denies the possibility of 
discovering causal laws in society and in history. Instead, he at-
tempts to connect the goals of progress that the Enlightenment 
had placed in perfection, happiness, the development of our ca-
pacities, and in culture generally, with the a priori of the moral 
law, and thus to establish a priori the sense and meaning of the 
2x Ernst W. G. Wachsmuth (r784-r866), German historian; author of Theorie 
der historischen Forschungen, r 8 20. 
2' Wilhelm von Humboldt, "Uber die Aufgaben des Geschichtschreibers" (r82r), 
in Gesammelte Schriften (Berlin: Prussian Academy, 1903-36), vol. IV, pp. 35-56. 
130 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
teleological system. In doing so, Kant simply transposed the duty 
of perfection assumed in the school of Christian Wolff as the tele-
ological principle for historical progress into his a priori of the 
moral law. Similarly, the contrast between empirical and philo-
Io8 
sophical sciences in Wolff returns in the contrast between an em-
pirical, anthropological conception of the human race and an a 
priori conception demanded by practical reason. The teleological 
interpretation of history as progress in the development of those 
natural capacities that are directed toward the use of reason- a 
progress that regulates these capacities in a society that adminis-
ters justice universally and aims at a "perfectly just civil constitu-
tion" as the "ultimate purpose of nature for the human race"-
provides the a priori clue by means of which the confused play of 
human affairs becomes intelligible. That the just peaceful society, 
which is to overcome the relationships of power, justifies itself be-
fore reason as a condition arising from the recognition of duty and 
not as a "merely physical good," and that by means of it a "great 
step toward morality" would be taken, emerges more strongly in 
other works than in his " 'Idea of a Universal History,' which is 
'limited' by the cosmopolitan point of view," and restricted by its 
occasion. Accordingly, Kant's importance in this area consists first 
of all in the fact that he applied the transcendental philosophical 
point of view, founded by himself and Fichte, to history and thereby 
inaugurated an enduring conception of history, the essence of which 
consists in the assertion of an absolute measure grounded in the 
essence of reason itself, of an unconditioned value or norm. The 
power of this conception consists in its allotting to action the de-
terminate direction toward a permanent ideal that is justified by 
its own ethical tendency, and in its evaluating every aspect of his-
tory according to its purposive direction toward the fulfillment of 
that ideal. 
Further important determinations result from that essential 
point of view. The rule of reason is realized only in the species. But 
that goal is not attained by means of peaceful cooperation of indi-
viduals. "Man wishes concord, but nature, knowing better what is 
good for the species, wishes discord. "30 Nature attains its goal pre-
cisely by means of the movement of passions, egoism, and the 
conflict of powers. 
"'Immanuel Kant, "Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose," 
in Political Writings, 2nd ed., ed. by Hans Reiss (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1991), p. 45· 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
131 
This standpoint of Kant worked itself out in the historiography 
of Friedrich Schlosser/
1 whose natural tendencies and life-course 
made him receptive to Kant's ideas. Schlosser undertook each indi-
vidual historical work from the standpoint of universal history; he 
subjected historical personalities to a rigid moral concept and thus 
lacked any sense for the splendor of historical life and the individ-
ual charm of great personalities. He was not able to resolve the 
dualism that existed between this moral judgment and the ac-
Io9 
knowledgment that there is an amoral tendency in states to seek 
power and unscrupulous political greatness. Since Schlosser, like 
Kant, sought the focal point of history in culture, the cultural-
historical perspective was the basic tendency of his treatment of 
history. Certainly, Schlosser's history of cultural life is the most 
brilliant part of his works. One can even say that Gervinus's32 ac-
count of our national literature in the eighteenth century depended 
on these works in its basic features. Schlosser demonstrated the 
value of silent deep inwardness as opposed to all the pomp of the 
world. And his greatest contribution was that his history pursued 
the purpose of educating his people to a practical world-view. 13 
The transcendental philosophical standpoint proceeds from the 
given to its a priori conditions. Fichte also maintained this stand-
point in opposition to Hegel's philosophy of history: the factical 
and historical can never be "metaphysicized," the chasm between 
it and ideas cannot be filled in by means of a conceptual poetry; 
the unconditioned cannot be dissolved by means of concepts into 
the flow of history and be resolved into an ideal system. Ideas 
stand above this world like stars that point the way for man. 
Fichte made an important advance beyond Kant in conceiving 
history from the transcendental standpoint. He proceeded from 
the Kantian enlightenment to the above sketched dawn of the his-
torical consciousness. In the time between the catastrophe of Jena34 
and the beginning of the wars of liberation, he witnessed how all 
11 Friedrich Christoph Schlosser (I776-I86I), German historian; author of Ge-
schichte des I 8. Jahrhunderts und des I9. his zum Sturz des franzosischen Kaiser-
reichs and Weltgeschichte fur das deutsche Volk. 
32 Georg G. Gervinus (I8o5-7I), German historian and literary critic. One of his 
main works is Geschichte der deutschen Dichtung (History of German Literature), 
5 vols. (I835-42). 
33 I refer here to my essay on Schlosser. (D) See "Friedrich Christoph Schlosser 
and the Problem of Universal History," SW 4, 279-324. 
14 Dilthey alludes to Napoleon's victory in the I 8o6 Battle of Jena and to the 
collapse of the Prussian state. 
132 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
German intellectual interests were shifting to the historical world 
and the state. In this time frame, we see Romanticism develop a 
scientific interest in history, Schelling's construction of history, 
Hegel's phenomenology of spirit, and the beginning of his logic. 
These were the conditions under which Fichte took up the prob-
lem of how history becomes intelligible on the basis of an ideal 
order. Like Kant, he did not address the epistemological question 
of how the knowledge of the nexus of history contained in the 
factually existing science of history was possible. Rather, from the 
very beginning, he submitted the sum of the historical events to 
the a priori evaluative standpoint of his moral principle, which 
formed the basic idea of all his studies in the philosophy of history 
up to the last step in the "Deduction of the Object of Human 
r ro 
History." From that point of view, history appears as a system 
that is grounded in the free deed of the absolute ego and that runs 
its course in the temporal development of the human race, a sys-
tem in which the "Cultivation of Humanity" is carried out in ac-
cordance with a divine world-plan. "For the philosopher, the uni-
verse of reason develops purely from thought as such. " 31 And 
"Philosophy reaches its limit" where "the comprehensible ends. " 36 
The philosopher of history "investigates only that in the full course 
of time whereby humanity actually advances toward its goal; ne-
glecting and despising everything else. " 37 Thus a selection of his-
torical material is made here from the standpoint of an uncondi-
tioned value to produce a system. By contrast, the "empirical 
historian," the "annalist, " 38 begins with the factual existence of 
the present. He strives to grasp the state of the present as exactly 
as possible and to discover the presuppositions of its emergence in 
previous facts. It is his task to gather the historical facts carefully 
and to disclose their succession and their productive nexus in time. 
"History is merely empirical; it has only facts to offer, and all its 
proofs can be furnished only as factual. " 39 These established re-
sults of the historian serve philosophical deduction not as proofs 
but only as illustrations. Only a domain including both those 
' 1 Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Die Grundziige des gegenwartigen Zeitalters, in Ge-
samtausgabe der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften I Hrsg. von Reinhard 
Lauth und Hans Jacob, series I, vol. 8 (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann, 
1962-), Seventh Lecture, I I 8:276. 
'" Fichte, Grundziige, Ninth Lecture, I I 8:301. 
37 Fichte, Grundziige, Ninth Lecture, I I 8:304. 
'" Fichte, Grundziige, Ninth Lecture, I I 8:304. 
39 Fichte, Grundziige, Ninth Lecture, I I 8:301. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
133 
modes of procedure can contain what Fichte once designated "the 
logic of historical truth. " 40 Therefore it falls short of a consciously 
methodological analysis of the science of history. It should, how-
ever, be acknowledged that important thoughts occurred to him 
on the path of his teleological deduction. He separated physics, 
which has what is permanent and periodically recurring in exis-
tence as its object, and history, whose object is the course of time. 
But on the basis of his Science of Knowledge, 
41 this course became 
development for him: indeed, Hegel's concept of development was 
conceived on the basis of Fichte. His theoretical and practical sci-
ence of knowledge were already intended to present the inner dia-
lectic of real progress as it issues from the creative power of the 
ego. It set out to trace the course of what occurs in the ego and to 
project a pragmatic history of the human spirit. Here the concept 
of development was rooted in the determination that everything in 
the ego is activity, that every activity begins from within, and that 
its fulfillment is the condition for subsequent activity. In his De-
duction of I 8 I 3, Fichte grapples with the same intuition of the 
free productive force of the ego in opposition to nature, which is 
III 
inert and dead. History manifests a teleologically necessary nexus, 
the individual members of which are produced by freedom, and 
whose terminus is the moral law. Every member of this series is 
factual, unique, individual. The value that Kant had placed in the 
person insofar as the moral law is realized in it was transferred to 
individuality by Fichte and Schleiermacher. Because the rationalis-
tic perspective saw the value of the person only in the fulfillment 
of the universal moral law, the individual became for it an empiri-
cal, contingent addendum. Fichte was able to connect the meaning 
of the individual more intimately with the problem of history. He 
united the value of the individual with the concern for the goal of 
the species by means of the profound thought that creative indi-
viduals grasp that goal from a new, previously hidden aspect, give 
it a new form in themselves, thereby raising individual existence 
to a worthwhile moment in the context of the historical whole. 
Fichte's heroic nature, the task of the time, and his historical prob-
lem combined to produce a new esteem for the value of the deed 
and of the man of action. But at the same time, he understood the 
heroism of the religious seer, of the artist, and of the thinker. In 
that respect, he anticipated Carlyle. The unique and the factual in 
4
'' Fichte, Grundziige, Seventh Lecture, I/8: 2 77. 
4 ' Wissenschaftslehre. 
134 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
history acquire a new meaning when they are apprehended as 
achievements of creative power and of freedom. And if he con-
ceived the irrationality of the historical from this standpoint, then 
he had to ascribe a value even to the irrational insofar as it is 
essentially a product of freedom and stands in relation to culture 
and the moral order. 
In addition to these theories of history that asserted the tran-
scendental philosophical standpoint, other theories that have also 
claimed a lasting worth were developed at the same time on the 
basis of other approaches. Works were written in France and En-
gland from the standpoint of natural science. The French works 
were based predominantly upon the evolution of the universe, the 
history of the earth, the emergence of plants and animals there, 
the affinity of higher animal types with man, and finally the lawful 
connection of human history and the manifestation of intellectual 
and social progress. The English works, by contrast, were based 
predominantly on the new associationist psychology and its appli-
cations to society. Their further development in Comte and Mill 
will be dealt with later. Another contemporaneous approach was 
112 
instituted by the German monists, Schelling, Schleiermacher and 
Hegel. They undertook to make the course of history available to 
a conceptual construction. 42 
In the r 8 2os, the Historical School had developed the system-
atic coherence of its methodological procedures, and idealism had 
worked out its various forms. This launched a period in Germany 
when historical studies influenced philosophical thought in many 
ways. Conversely, the transcendental philosophy of Hegel and 
Schleiermacher exercised considerable influence upon the histori-
cal thinkers. They went back to the creative power at work in 
men, they grasped it in the communal spirit and in organized com-
munities, and beyond the cooperation of the nations they sought a 
system of history grounded in the invisible. From there the general 
reflections of Humboldt, Gervinus, Droysen, among others, devel-
oped the notion that ideas govern history. 
The famous treatise of Humboldt on the task of the historiogra-
pher is based upon the thesis of transcendental philosophy that 
whatever is operative in the history of the world also stirs the in-
ner life of human beings. Humboldt's point of departure was the 
individual human being. The period sought a new culture in the 
42 See above, GS VII, 98ff. [this volume 120-23], and the already cited ]ugend-
geschichte Hegels. (D) 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
I 3 5 
shaping of personality. Because it found this kind of shaping real-
ized in the Greek world, the ideal of Greek humanity arose. But 
through transcendental philosophy, the ideal of humanity acquired 
a new depth in its most important representatives, such as Hum-
boldt, Schiller, Holderlin, and Friedrich Schlegel in his first period. 
In the school of Leibniz, the intrinsic value of the person had been 
defined as perfection. For the Kantians it appeared as dignity on 
the basis of the person as an end in itself, and for Fichteans as the 
energy of giving shape. In each of these forms, the ideal of human-
ity derives from the background of individual existence, a univer-
sally valid regularity of human nature, its configuration and pur-
pose. And from this Humboldt and Schleiermacher at the same 
time developed the intuition of the transcendental unity of human 
nature in all individuals, which is the basis for organized commu-
nities and a communal spirit. This transcendental unity of human 
nature is then individualized in races, nations, and individual per-
sons, and these forms represent the highest formative power of 
this transcendental unity. And when the creative power of this hu-
rr3 
manity actualizing itself in individuals was related to the power of 
the invisible, the belief arose that history serves to realize some 
ideal implanted in mankind. "The goal of history can only be that 
the idea to be explicated through humanity be actualized in all 
directions and in all the configurations in which a finite form can 
be connected with this idea. " 43 That was the source of Humboldt's 
concept of ideas in history. Ideas are creative forces that are grounded 
in the transcendental universal validity of human nature. They 
penetrate our needs, passions, and whatever seems contingent just 
as light passes through the earth's atmosphere. We perceive them 
in the eternal archetypal ideas of beauty, truth, and justice; at the 
same time, they give the course of history both a force and a direc-
tion. They express themselves as tendencies that exert an irresist-
ible hold on the masses, and as a productive force that, in its scope 
and sublimity, cannot be derived from the accompanying circum-
stances. After the historian has studied the shape and transforma-
tions of the earth, the changes of climate, the intellectual capacity 
and sensory character of nations and their even more distinctive 
counterparts in individuals, the influences of art and science, as 
well as the decisive interventions and widespread influences of 
bourgeois institutions:, there remains the even more powerful but 
not immediately visible principle of ideas that lends impulse and 
43 Humboldt, "Uber die Aufgaben des Geschichtschreibers," p. 56. 
I 3 6 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
direction to those productive forces. These ideas have their ulti-
mate source in the divine governance of the world. The agent must 
submit to the tendency contained in the idea in order to achieve 
positive historical effects. And the highest goal of the historian is 
to grasp this. Just as the free imitation of the artist is directed by 
ideas, so the historian should grasp such ideas over and above the 
effect that finite forces have on events. The historian is the artist 
that exhibits this invisible nexus in the events. Humboldt pub-
lished his treatise at the beginning of the r 8 20s in the midst of a 
great flowering of the human sciences. Since it brought to expres-
sion the moments working together in that movement, it exercised 
an extraordinary influence. 
In the year r837, Gervinus's Grundzuge der Historik (Outlines 
of a Theory of History) appeared. It provided a comprehensive 
survey of the historical literature, its forms and directions. But at 
its core there was still the same historical mood and the same 
basic conception of historical ideas "invisibly penetrating events 
and external phenomena; "
44 providence reveals itself in these 
ideas, and to investigate their essence and efficacy is the proper 
114 
task of the historian. Ranke's intuitive insights about history, 
which developed gradually hand in hand with his works, still 
show a kinship with Humboldt, but grasp historical movement 
much more vitally and truthfully. These ideas become tendencies 
for him; generated by the historical situation, "they are moral en-
ergies. "
45 These tendencies are always one-sided, are embodied in 
great personalities and work through them. At the height of their 
power, these tendencies incite countertendencies, and thus the fate 
of every finite force befalls them. They cannot be expressed in 
concepts, "but one can intuit them, perceive them," and sympa-
thize with their existence. Because Ranke then locates the course 
of history within the· perspective of the divine governance of the 
world, these tendencies become "God's thoughts in the world" for 
him. In them "lies the secret of the history of the world. " 46 Then 
Droysen's Historik appeared in r868, in conscious opposition to 
Ranke, yet intimately connected with him by means of the com-
mon idealism of the epoch. Even more than Humboldt, Droysen 
was strongly influenced by the speculation of the time, by the con-
44 Georg Gottfried Gervinus, Grundzuge der Historik (Leipzig: Verlag Wilhelm 
Engelmann, 1837), p. 66. 
45 Leopold von Ranke, "Politisches Gespriich," in Siimtliche Werke, val. 49/50 
(Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1887), p. 327· 
46 Ranke, "Politisches Gesprach," pp. 3 28-29. 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
137 
cept of active ideas in history and of an external teleology in the 
historical nexus that produces a cosmos of ethical ideas. He subor-
dinated history to the ethical order of things, which worked against 
an impartial conception of the course of world events; it was the 
expression of a faith in an unconditional ideal system of things 
based in God. 
These works contain important insights; Droysen was the first 
to use the hermeneutic theory of Schleiermacher and Boeckh for 
methodological purposes. But a theoretical formative system of 
the human sciences was not attained by these thinkers. Humboldt 
possessed a deep awareness of the new ways in which the German 
human sciences attempted to tap what is universally valid in spirit. 
Thus he was the first to grasp that the historian, in spite of being 
bound to his object, nevertheless creates from within himself. He 
recognized his kinship with the artist. And all the work of histori-
cal research is encompassed in some way and summarized within 
the narrow framework of his treatise. But here too the articulation 
of his overall insight into history was denied him. The ultimate 
reason for this is that he had not placed the problem of history in 
relation to the epistemological task that history poses for us. This 
question would have led him to the more comprehensive investiga-
tion into the formation of the historical world in the human sci-
ences and thereby to the recognition that objective knowledge in 
the human sciences is possible. In the final analysis, the objective 
us 
of Humboldt's treatise was to ascertain what history looks like 
under the presuppositions of the idealistic world-view and how it 
is to be written. His theory of ideas is the explication of this stand-
point. What was old-fashioned in allowing religious faith and ide-
alistic metaphysics to interfere with historical science became cen-
tral to the historical perspective of Humboldt and the historical 
thinkers that followed. Instead of looking into the epistemological 
presuppositions of the Historical School and into the presupposi-
tions of idealism from Kant till Hegel and thus recognizing their 
incompatibility, they connected these standpoints uncritically. The 
connection between the newly constituted human sciences, the 
problem of a critique of historical reason, and the formation of a 
historical world in the human sciences did not dawn on them. 
The next task was to apply such a purely epistemological and 
logical problematic to history and to separate it from attempts to 
philosophically construct the course of history as undertaken by 
Fichte with his five epochs and Hegel with his phases of develop-
ment. The former problematic had to be distinguished from that 
I3 8 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
of the philosophers of history in order to fully develop the various 
positions that can be adopted by epistemologists and logicians re-
garding history. From the final decades of the nineteenth century 
till the present, various approaches toward the solution of this 
task have developed. Positions that had been adopted earlier were 
revised; new positions also emerged. But when we survey all of 
them, one overarching opposition asserts itself: Either one at-
tempted to solve it on the basis of German idealism as developed 
from Kant to Hegel, or one looked to the reality of the world of 
human spirit for the coherence of history. 
The former approach produced two main tendencies to solve the 
task based on the course of German speculative thought. The first 
tendency was based on Kant and Fichte. Their point of departure 
was universal or superindividual consciousness, in which the tran-
scendental method discovered something unconditional, such as 
norms or values. The determination of what is unconditioned and 
of its relationship to the understanding of history took very many 
forms within this great and influential school. The two ultimate 
presuppositions at which Kant's transcendental analysis arrived, his 
rr6 
theoretical and his practical a priori, were brought together in one 
unitary-unconditioned by following out Fichte's path. What is un-
conditioned could be considered as norm, as idea, or as value. The 
problem could either be the formation of the human world of spirit 
on the basis of the a priori, or a principle of selection and coherence 
for more restricted spheres of individual life histories. 
Over against this tendency of German idealism, Hegel's genial 
contribution to history has been too much overlooked till now. 
His metaphysical position was overwhelmed by critique from the 
side of epistemology. But in the systematic human sciences, there 
remains up to this day a link between his great ideas and positive 
inquiry. His influence also continues in the ways the phases of 
spirit are still ordered in the writing of history. The time will also 
come when his attempt to form a nexus of concepts to rein in the 
incessant stream of history will be evaluated and appreciated. 
In opposition to this theory, there arose a conception that rejects 
every transcendental and metaphysical principle for understanding 
the world of human spirit. It negates the value of the transcenden-
tal and metaphysical method. It denies all knowledge of an uncon-
ditional value, of an absolutely valid norm, of a divine plan, or of 
a system of reason grounded in the absolute. Inasmuch as it ac-
knowledges the relativity of all human, historical givens without 
exception, it sets itself the task of acquiring objective knowledge 
concerning human reality and the connection of its parts from the 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
139 
material of the given. It has at its disposal for the execution of 
those tasks only the combination of the various species of what is 
given and the various modes of procedure. 
Among those who have attempted to ground this standpoint 
theoretically and consistently, quite different tendencies have 
evolved, just as in the other group. Especially significant is the 
opposition that already differentiated the schools of Comte and 
Mill concerning the formation of the historical world. The coher-
ence of the world of human spirit, on the one hand, is given only 
in individual psychological beings and, on the other hand, in the 
course of history and societal states. Because inquiry combines these 
two kinds of givens differently in light of its conception of their 
import, multiple approaches to the formation of the human sciences 
develop. They range from those that strive to dispense with psychol-
ogy to those that grant it the status in the human sciences that 
mechanics has in the natural sciences. Other differences manifest 
themselves in basic epistemological and logical conceptions of the 
formation of the historical world, in the way psychology or a sci-
ence of psychophysical life-units is worked out, and in the deter-
mination of regularities that arise from the social relationships be-
tween these life-units. Finally, the manifold solutions to ultimate 
questions about historical and social laws, about progress, about 
order in the course of history, depend on these differences. 
5 
I shall now attempt to define the task that my present inquiry 
about the formation of the historical world in the human sciences 
has set itself within the above sketched scientific context. It is a 
continuation of the first volume of my Introduction to the Human 
Sciences of r 8 8 3. The point of departure of that work was the 
task of a critique of historical reason. It positioned itself in rela-
tion to the factually existing human sciences as the Historical 
School organized these sciences and sought their epistemological 
foundation, but in a way that resisted the intellectualism of the 
epistemology that was dominant then. "A historical as well as psy-
chological approach to whole human beings led me to explain 
even knowledge and its concepts (such as the external world, time, 
substance, and cause) in terms of the manifold powers of a being 
that wills, feels, and thinks. " 47 The human sciences proceeded 
47 See my Introduction to the Human Sciences, preface (D), SW r, so. 
II7 
I40 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
from life and understanding, and from the relationship of reality, 
value, and purpose that is implicit in life. This approach under-
took to demonstrate the independent position of the human sci-
ences over against the natural sciences, to sketch the basic features 
of their epistemic and logical system in its fullness and totality, 
and to assert the importance of taking the singular into account in 
history. Now I will attempt to justify the standpoint of that work 
more fully by investigating the formation of the historical world in 
the human sciences as an epistemological problem. The connec-
tion between epistemology and this formation is that the analysis 
of the latter points to an intersection of functions that becomes 
accessible through such a differentiated mode of epistemological 
mqmry. 
I I 8 
I will briefly sketch the line that is supposed to lead from what 
has been discussed earlier to the conceptual cognition of the for-
mation of the human sciences in order to right away make visible 
the contrast that exists in the way the natural and human sciences 
were formed. The factually existing human sciences as they were 
developed in the epoch of their constitution has been described. It 
was further shown that these sciences are grounded in lived expe-
rience and understanding. On this basis, their formation must be 
conceived in accordance with the way they were constituted inde-
pendently by the Historical School. This opens up an insight into 
the sharp difference between the formation of the natural and the 
human sciences. What is distinctive about the formation of the 
human sciences will thus become the main theme of this work. 
Beginning with lived experience, this formation proceeds from 
reality to reality. It penetrates ever more deeply into historical real-
ity both to extract ever more from it and to survey it more fully. 
Here there are no hypothetical assumptions that impute something 
to what is given. For understanding penetrates into foreign mani-
festations by means of a transposition based on the fullness of 
one's own lived experiences. We saw that nature is a constituent of 
history only insofar as it has an effect and in how it can be af-
fected. The proper domain of history is, to be sure, also external; 
yet the tones that form a musical composition, the canvas on 
which we paint, the courtroom in which a verdict is pronounced, 
the prison in which a sentence is served, merely have theicmaterial 
in nature. Every operation of the human sciences dealing with 
such external states of affairs has to do merely with the sense and 
meaning they receive through the activity of spirit and how it 
serves the understanding that grasps this meaning and sense in 
MODES OF FORMATION IN THE SCIENCES 
141 
them. And now we move beyond what has already been said. This 
understanding does not just designate a distinctive methodological 
approach that we assume over against such objects. The difference 
between the human and natural sciences is not just about the 
stance of the subject toward the object; it is not merely about a 
kind of attitude, a method. Rather, the procedure of understand-
ing is grounded in the realization that the external reality that 
constitutes its objects is totally different from the objects of the 
natural sciences. Spirit has objectified itself in the former, purposes 
have been embodied in them, values have been actualized in them, 
and understanding grasps this spiritual content that has been formed 
in them. A life-relationship exists between me and them. Their 
purposiveness is grounded in my capacity to set purposes, their 
beauty and goodness in my capacity to establish value, their intel-
rr9 
ligibility in my intellect. Furthermore, these realities are not reduc-
ible to my lived experience and understanding: they form the 
nexus of a representational world in which the externally given is 
connected with the course of my life. I live in this representational 
world, and its objective validity is guaranteed to me through a 
constant interchange with the lived experience and understanding 
of others. Finally, the concepts, the universal judgments, the gen-
eral theories [of the human sciences] are not hypotheses about 
something to which we relate external impressions but derive from 
lived experience and understanding. Just as here the totality of our 
life is always present, the fullness of life also resonates in the most 
abstract propositions of this kind of science. 
We can now recapitulate the relationship between both kinds of 
science and the fundamental differences in their formation as rec-
ognized so far. Nature is the substratum of the human sciences. 
Nature is not merely the arena of history; the physical processes 
and the necessities inherent in nature, and the effects that issue 
from them, form the substratum for all relationships, such as do-
ing and suffering, action and reaction, in the historical world. And 
the physical world also provides the material for the entire realm 
in which spirit has expressed its purposes, its values- its essence. 
But on this substratum there arises a reality into which the human 
sciences probe ever more deeply from two sides- from the lived 
experience of one's own states and from the understanding of ob-
jectified spirit in the external world. This marks the difference be-
tween the two sorts of sciences: In external nature, the connect-
edness of phenomena is derived from a combination of abstract 
concepts, but connectedness in the human world of spirit is expe-
142 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
rienced and understood. The system of nature is abstract, whereas 
the nexus of psychic and historical reality is lived and saturated 
with life. The natural sciences supplement phenomena by adding 
thought. Although the properties of organisms and the principle of 
individuation of the organic world have up till now resisted con-
ceptual comprehension by the natural sciences, nevertheless, the 
postulate of such comprehension will always remain alive: merely 
some missing causal intermediaries stand in the way. Ideally they 
must be discoverable. The perspective that seeks to introduce a 
new principle of explanation into this intermediary realm between 
inorganic nature and spirit will always find strong opposition 
from this ideal. By contrast to the natural sciences, the human 
sciences classify phenomena by primarily and mainly translating 
the immeasurable external reality of the sociohistorical, human 
uo 
world back into the spiritual life from which it arose. The natural 
sciences seek hypothetical causal grounds for individuation, whereas 
in the human sciences, its causes are experienced vividly. 
This allows us to disclose the stance that the following inquiry 
into the formation of the historical world in the human sciences 
will adopt. The central problem for an epistemology solely con-
cerned with the natural sciences consists in grounding abstract 
truths, in establishing the character of the necessity of such truths 
and causal laws, and in relating the reliability of inductive infer-
ences to their abstract foundations. Because epistemology as based 
on the natural sciences has disintegrated into the most varied di-
rections, it may seem to many that it will share the fate of meta-
physics. By contrast, our survey of the formation of the human 
sciences has already demonstrated a very different cognitive stance 
toward objects in this region. For now, the future of a general 
epistemology appears to depend on its taking account of the hu-
man sciences. But that requires that the formation of the historical 
world in the human sciences be studied by starting with the epis-
temological problem. Only then can general epistemology be re-
vised on the basis of the results of this study. 
III. GENERAL THESES ABOUT THE SYSTEM 
OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
The foundation of the human sciences must fulfill three tasks. It 
must define the general character of the system in which univer-
sally valid knowledge emerges on the basis of the givens in this 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
143 
domain. This concerns the general logical structure of the human 
sciences. Then it is necessary to explicate the formation of the 
human world of spirit in terms of specific domains and to show 
how the human sciences complete this formation in a system of 
intermeshing functions or contributions. This is the second task, 
and its solution will gradually produce the methodology of the 
human sciences by abstracting from its procedures. Finally, there is 
the question of the epistemic value of these contributions of the 
r2r 
human sciences and to what extent this cooperation makes it pos-
sible for there to be objective knowledge in the human sciences. 
There is an even closer connection between the last two tasks. 
Separating the respective functions of the human sciences makes it 
possible to test their epistemic worth, and this shows the extent to 
which the reality of the human sciences and their system is raised 
to the level of knowledge. In this way, an independent foundation 
is obtained in our domain for epistemology. This also opens up the 
prospect for a general epistemological system whose starting point 
would lie in the human sciences. 
The general character of the system of the human sciences is our 
first problem. Its starting point is the structural theory of objective 
apprehension in general. It shows in all apprehension a progres-
sive line that goes behind the given to the basic relationships of 
reality available to conceptual thought. The same forms of thought 
and the same kinds of logical functions belonging to them make it 
possible to constitute a scientific system in the natural and the hu-
man sciences. From this substrate, there then emerge from the 
application of these forms of thought and logical functions the 
specific methods resulting from the particular tasks and the special 
conditions of the human sciences. Since the tasks of the sciences 
give rise to the methods for their solution, the specific procedures 
form an inner system conditioned by the end of knowledge. 
Section One: Objective Apprehension 
Objective apprehension forms a system of relations in which per-
ceptions and lived experiences, remembered representations, judg-
ments, concepts, inferences, and their combinations are contained. 
All these functions in the system of objective apprehension are 
alike in that only relations within the factical are present. Thus 
only contents and their relations are present in syllogisms, and no 
consciousness of logical operations accompanies them. The pro-
144 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
cedure that makes what is given dependent on specific acts as con-
ditions of consciousness in which actual relations are correspond-
ingly thought and that derives the actuality of objective apprehension 
from their cooperation involves a hypothesis that is never verifiable. 
122 
Specific lived experiences within objective apprehension are 
members of a whole that is determined by the psychic nexus. 
Within this psychic nexus, objective cognition of reality is the con-
dition for the correct establishment of values and purposive ac-
tion. Thus perceiving, representing, judging, and inferring are 
functions that cooperate in a teleology of the system of apprehen-
sion, which then assumes its place in the nexus of life. 
I 
The first function or contribution of objectively apprehending the 
given is to raise its content to distinct consciousness without intro-
ducing any change in the form of their givenness. I call this func-
tion primary, because the analysis that proceeds backwards from 
discursive thought can find no more simple function. It lies outside 
discursive thought, which is bound to language and proceeds in 
terms of judgments. Any objects about which we judge already 
presuppose logical functions. 
I begin with the function of comparison. I find similarity, dis-
similarity, and apprehend gradations of contrast. When two sheets 
of paper with different gray coloring lie before me, contrasts and 
degrees of contrast will be noted, not in reflecting about the given, 
but as part of the state of affairs, just as the color itself is. Sim-
ilarly, I can distinguish as part of having an experience degrees of 
satisfaction, as when after sounding a bass note and its mere oc-
tave I proceed to play the full chord. This function of comparison 
is purely logical and simple. The truth value of its result is no 
different from the noting of a color or a tone; something that is 
there is noted. Yet identity and difference are not properties of 
things as are extension and color. They arise when a psychic being 
brings to consciousness relationships that are implicit in the given. 
Insofar as equating and differentiating merely find what is given, 
just as extension and color are given, they are analogous to per-
ception itself; but insofar as they create logical, relational concepts 
such as identity, difference, degree, and affinity that are implicit in 
perception, but not given in it, they belong to thought. 
On the basis of this logical function of comparison, there emerges 
a second such function. When I separate two states of affairs, we 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
145 
have logically speaking- for we are here not concerned with psy-
chological processes- a different logical function than distinguish-
ing or noting contrasts. When two states of affairs within a given 
r23 
are held apart, their separateness is noted. Thus in a forest a hu-
man voice, the rushing of wind, and the song of a bird are not 
merely distinguished from each other but apprehended as a multi-
plicity. When a tone with the same character, that is, with the 
same pitch, tonality, intensity and duration occurs a second time 
at another point in the time sequence, the consciousness arises in 
accordance with this second logical function that the subsequent 
tone is a different tone than the first. Another relationship can be 
apprehended in a second example of separation. I can separate the 
color and shape of a green leaf in the following way: that which 
belongs together in the unity of the object and which cannot be 
really separated is nevertheless found to be ideally separable. Even 
where the preconditions of this function of separation are very 
complex, the function itself is simple. Separation is just as much 
determined by the state of affairs that it brings to apprehension as 
0 
0 
1s companson. 
At this point we can gain a prospect on the process of abstrac-
tion, which is important for the formation of logic. When separa-
tion is applied to the member parts of a body, it still must take 
account of the concrete reality of this body; the whole reality of 
the body is preserved in each of its parts. But when extension and 
color are separated from each other and thought attends to the 
color, then such a separation leads to the logical function of ab-
straction: from that which has been ideally taken apart, one side is 
focused on by itself. 
The connection of several separated items can only be achieved 
on the basis of a relation between them. We apprehend the spatial 
locations of separated states of affairs or the intervals at which 
processes follow each other temporally. This kind of relating and 
connecting again merely brings existing relationships to conscious-
ness. It does this, however, by means of logical functions that have 
as their basis relations such as those of space and time, acting and 
suffering. Such a gathering together is the condition for the forma-
tion of the intuition of time. When the strokes of a clock follow 
each other repeatedly, there is a succession of these impressions, 
but the apprehension of this succession is only possible in a gath-
ering together. This grasping together produces the logical rela-
tionship of a whole to its parts. On the basis of relationships of 
being separated, and of a gradation of relational contrasts inher-
146 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
ent in . the tonal system, there· emerges something that has been 
produced in a gathering together: a chord or a melody. Here it is 
especially clear that the grasping together is about something al-
ready contained in the broad experience of perceiving and remem-
r 24 
bering, and yet something emerges that would not exist without 
the grasping together. Here we approach a limit in establishing 
what inheres in relationships and move into the region of free 
imagination. 
These examples, and that is all they are, demonstrate that ele-
mentary logical functions explicate the given. They precede discur-
sive thought and contain its rudiments, because the finding of sim-
ilarities prepares for the formation of general judgments, universal 
concepts, and the comparative method. Similarly, separation pre-
pares for abstraction and the analytic procedure, and finally rela-
tions ·prepare for synthetic operations. Thus there is a founda-
tional continuum that proceeds from elementary operations of 
thought to discursive thought, from apprehending the states of ob-
jects to making judgments about them. 
The givenness of what is experienced or perceived by the senses 
passes over into a further stage of consciousness as a remembered 
representation. Here we see another function of objective appre-
hension, a function that involves a new product with a special 
relationship to its substratum. This relationship of the remem-
bered representation to what has been sensuously apprehended or 
experienced is that of reproducing or imaging. For within the 
realm of objective apprehension, the spontaneity of representa-
tions is limited by the intention to approximate reality, and all 
modes of representational formation are determined. by their di-
rectedness at reality. Total representations and universal represen-
tations also arise in this way and prepare for a new stage of con-
sciousness that appears in discursive thought. The relation of 
reproducing or imaging now makes way for another relation within 
objective apprehension. 
Discursive thought is dependent on expression, especially on 
language. Here there is the relation of expression to what is ex-
pressed by which, on the basis of the movements of speech organs 
and of the representations of their products, linguistic forms arise. 
Their function arises from the relation to what is expressed in 
them. As constituents of a sentence, linguistic forms have a mean-
ing, whereas the sentence itself has a sense. The direction of appre-
hension proceeds from word and sentence to the object expressed 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
14 7 
by them. This also leads to the relation between the grammatical 
sentence or an expression by means of other signs and the judg-
ment established by all modes of discursive thought. 
What kind of relationship is there between what is given or rep-
resented, conditioned as it was by the various functions of the 
experience of apprehension, and the judgment? A state of affairs is 
125 
asserted in a judgment, which already entails that we are no longer 
speaking of a copy of the given or represented. For a positive defi-
nition of the relationship, I will proceed from the idea of a system 
of thought. Each judgment is analytically contained in this system 
and is understood as a part of it. In the logical system of objective 
apprehension, each part refers to its being contained in reality by 
means of its place in that logical system. The highest rule govern-
ing any judgment is that its content must be contained in the given 
in accordance with the formal laws of logic and the logical forms. 
Even judgments that attribute properties or actions to Zeus or 
Hamlet are referred within the logical system to something given. 
Thus a new relationship emerges between the judgment and the 
previously described forms of objective apprehension. This is a 
two-sided relationship that is accounted for by the fact that the 
judgment, on the one hand, is founded in the given, but on the 
other hand, explicates that in it which is only implicitly there and 
needs to be inferred. The first aspect leads to the relationship of 
being representative. The judgment is representative of the states 
of affairs contained in the given by means of logical constituents 
that satisfy the demands of knowledge through constancy, clarity, 
distinctness, and through fixed connections with linguistic signs. 
Considered from the other aspect, judgments realize the intention 
of objective apprehension to approximate the fundamental struc-
tures of reality on the basis of the conditioned, the particular, and 
the changeable. 
The relationship of being representative applies to the entire dis-
cursive logical system of objective apprehension, since it occurs by 
means of judgment. The given in its intuitive concreteness and the 
representational world that is its image are being represented in 
every form of discursive thought by a system of relations between 
fixed logical components. Inversely, a return to the object can by 
the fullness of its intuitive existence verify or establish as true the 
judgment or the concept. Especially for the human sciences, it is 
very important that the full freshness and power of lived experi-
ence is revived in the return from understanding to experiencing. 
148 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
The relationship of being representative makes it possible that 
what is given and what is thought discursively are exchangeable to 
some extent. 
When the discursive logical system is analyzed, then one comes 
126 
upon kinds of relations that regularly recur independently of 
change of content and that coexist at every point in the nexus of 
thought. Such logical forms are judgment, concept, and inference. 
They appear at every point in the discursive logical system and 
form its structure. Also the classes of functions subsumed under 
these elementary forms of discursive thought, namely, comparison, 
inference by analogy, induction, classification, definition, and fi-
nally, the grounding relation, override any delimitations of realms 
of thought, especially the distinction between the natural and hu-
man sciences. They can be articulated on the basis of the tasks of 
the system of thought as a whole posed by reality according to its 
fundamental universal structures. By contrast, specifically config-
ured methods are conditioned by the features of particular realms. 
The regularity of these discursive forms corresponds to the va-
lidity of their logical function, and we are assured of this by the 
consciousness of evidence. The most general and constant proper-
ties to which the validity of these different forms is bound inde-
pendently of change in objects, and despite the comings and goings 
of the experiences of thinking and of their subjects, find their ex-
pression in the laws of thought. We need not go beyond the rela-
tionship of being representative or of re-presenting when moving 
from judgments about reality to necessary judgments. An axiom 
of geometry is necessary because it expresses the basic relation-
ships that can be established everywhere in spatial intuition through 
analysis. Similarly, the character of necessity in the laws of logic is 
adequately explained by the fact that it is analytically contained 
everywhere in the nexus of thought. 
A scientific method emerges when logical forms and general 
functions of thought are combined into a complex whole by means 
of the purpose of solving a specific scientific problem. If there are 
other problems similar to this one, then the method that is applied 
to a limited domain can prove to be fruitful for~a larger domain. It 
is often the case that a method associated with an individual who 
invented it is not yet understood in logical terms and according to 
its full import. Because of the way in which the concept of method 
has evolved over the centuries, especially in scientific usage, a pro-
cedure dealing with a question of detail, and therefore very com-
plex, can also be designated as method. When several paths can be 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
149 
taken toward the solution of the same problem, they are separated 
127 
as different methods. When the procedures of an inventive spirit 
manifest common properties, the history of science may speak of 
Cuvier's method in paleontology or of Niebuhr's method in histor-
ical criticism. With a theory of method, we enter the domain in 
which the special character of the human sciences begins to assert 
itself. 
All lived experiences belonging to the teleological system of ob-
jective apprehension are aimed at grasping what is- grasping real-
ity. Knowledge constitutes a hierarchy of functions: the given is 
explicated in elementary logical functions, it is reproduced in men-
tal representations, and it is logically represented in discursive 
thought- the given is thus subjected to various kinds of re-presen-
tation.4~ The explication of the given through elementary logical 
operations, its reproduction in the remembered representation, 
and its being logically represented in discursive thought can all be 
subsumed under the encompassing concept of re-presentation. 
Time and memory liberate apprehension from its dependence on 
the given and select out what is significant for apprehension. What 
is singular is subjected to the ends of apprehending reality by its 
relation to some whole and by being subordinated to what is uni-
versal. The mutability of what is intuitively given is transformed 
into a relation between concepts and universally valid re-presenta-
tion; abstraction and analysis either raise the concrete into homo-
geneous sequences necessary for the assertion of regularities or al-
low the articulation of the concrete to be conceived by means of 
classification. Thus apprehension increasingly mines that which is 
accessible to us in the given. 
2 
The lived experiences belonging to objective apprehension are log-
ically connected in two directions. In one direction, lived experi-
ences are referred to each other insofar as they are stages in the 
apprehension of the same object and seek to exhaust it by means 
of what is contained in experience or intuition. In the other direc-
tion, the apprehension of one state of affairs is connected with 
another state of affairs by the apprehended relations between them. 
4" Dilthey was able to use three different words for the English "representation": 
Vorstellung (mental representation), vertreten (to represent by substituting for), 
and Reprasentation (re-presentation). 
I 50 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
The former leads to an in-depth concentration on a single object, 
the latter leads to a universal expansion of scope. Both concentra-
tion and expansion are dependent on each other. 
Intuition, memory, total representation, naming, judgment, sub-
suming a particular under a universal, and relating parts into a 
128 
whole are all ways of apprehending. Even without any change in 
the object, a change in the consciousness of it, of the way that it is 
there for us, occurs when we shift from intuition to memory. Their 
common focus on the same object places them into one teleologi-
cal nexus. Only those lived experiences that fulfill a function 
aimed at grasping this specific object can play a role in this nexus. 
Our advance from part to part in this objective given is condi-
tioned by the teleological character of the just described nexus. As 
long as lived experience has not yet been exhausted or objective 
affairs that are given one-sidedly and piecemeal have not yet been 
fully grasped and completely expressed, there is always some dis-
satisfaction that forces us to go forward. Perceptions relating to 
the same object are related to each other in a teleological nexus to 
the extent that they advance toward the same object. Thus one 
particular sensuous perception demands ever more perceptions to 
complete the apprehension of an object. This process of comple-
tion already requires memory as a broader form of apprehension. 
Memory stands in the nexus of objective apprehension in a stable 
relation to the substratum of intuition, namely, it has the function 
of reproducing and remembering this substratum and thus to 
make it usable. Here we can clearly show the difference between 
the conception of an experience of remembering that studies the 
underlying process according to its uniformities and our approach 
to remembering according to its function in the nexus of appre-
hension, which is to reproduce what has been experienced or ap-
prehended. Memory as such can appropriate many contents that 
are different from its base due to some new impression or the 
influence of a state of mind, and this is the point where aesthetic 
fictional images have their origin. But memories that fall within 
the teleological system aiming to grasp the domain of the objective 
are directed at an identity with the intuitive or experienced con-
tent of the apprehension of objects. That memory has fulfilled its 
function within objective apprehension is proved by the possibility 
of establishing its similarity with the perceptual substratum of the 
apprehension of objects. In this directedness of experiences of ap-
prehension to a particular object, there is always already the ad-
vance to something new. Changes in the object point to the pro-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
ductive nexus or system in which it is located, and since these 
states of affairs can only be explicated by means of names, con-
cepts, and judgments, again an advance from particular intuition 
r29 
to the universal is required. Accordingly, the first direction already 
demands an advance to some whole, to what is productive, and to 
universality. Correspondingly, there is an advance from relations 
that can be found within an individual object to relations that 
occur within larger objective systems. Thus the first direction of 
relations leads to a second. 
The first direction relates all those lived experiences of appre-
hension that strive to grasp the same object ever more appro-
priately by means of various forms of re-presentation. The second 
direction connects those lived experiences that embrace ever more 
new objects and that grasp the relations between them, be it in the 
same mode of apprehension or by combining several forms of ap-
prehension. This leads to encompassing relations that are espe-
cially prominent in homogeneous systems exhibiting spatial, tonal, 
and numerical relations.49 Each science refers to a delimitable ob-
jective domain that provides its unity. The correlation of the var-
ious domains of science provides its cognitive claims with a sys-
tematic coherence. The completion of all relations contained in 
everything that has been experienced or intuited would be the con-
cept of world. This concept asserts the demand that everything 
capable of being experienced and intuited be articulated into a 
system of the relations of the factual givens of the world. This 
concept of world is the explication of a togetherness that is first 
given in the spatial horizon. 
Explication, reproductive imaging, and representing are stages 
in the process of referring to the given by which objective appre-
hension approaches the concept of world. They are stages, because 
in each of these attitudes of objective apprehension, the earlier 
stage forms the basis of the next stage.50 
49 See my Ideas, GS V, 132 (D), SW 2. 
50 This point provides a glimpse into the logical task of reducing the forms of 
discursive thought to expressions of relationships in the given as explicated by the 
elementary logical functions. The facts within the domain of sensuous apprehen-
sion lead us to the insight that order is immanent to the material of our sensuous 
experience. The separation of the material of impressions from the forms of com-
prehension proves to be a mere instrument of abstraction. The principle of identity 
signifies that every positing is valid independently of its changing position within 
the nexus of thought and of changes in the subjects that assert it. The principle of 
contradiction has the principle of identity as its substratum. It adds negation to the 
152 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
r3o 
Section Two: The Structure of the Human Sciences 
When the system of objective apprehension is related to the condi-
tions of the human sciences, then we can define their special struc-
ture. Although they use logical forms and universal logical func-
tions, the human sciences set themselves special tasks and find 
their solution in the integration of their own methods. 
In the formation of these procedures, the human sciences have 
generally been influenced by the natural sciences. Because the nat-
ural sciences· developed their methods earlier, they were to a large 
extent adapted to the tasks of the human sciences. This is espe-
cially clear in two cases. Comparative methods that first emerged 
in biology were applied to the systematic human sciences to an 
ever-increasing extent, and experimental methods developed in as-
tronomy and physiology were transferred to psychology, aesthetics, 
and educational theory. Even today, when psychologists, educa-
tionalists, linguists, and aestheticians tackle specific problems, they 
will often ask themselves whether the means and methods for the 
solution of analogous problems in the natural sciences can be 
fruitfully applied to their own field. 
But despite such particular points of contact, the procedures of 
the human sciences are from beginning to end different from those 
of the natural sciences. 
CHAPTER I: LIFE AND THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
I am here concerned only with the general principles that are deci-
sive for attaining insight into the system of human sciences, for an 
principle of identity. It is merely the rejection of an assumption that presents itself 
either within or without us; it refers always to an already presupposed assertion, 
whether it be contained in a conscious act of thought or in some other form. The 
principle of identity assigns a constant validity to what is posited, and that is why 
the cancellation of this posit is excluded. We are incapable of affirming and negat-
ing the same thing as long as we are conscious of the relationship of contradiction. 
If I declare the negative judgment false, then I refuse to cancel what has been 
posited, thus confirming the affirmative assertion. This state of affairs expresses the 
law of the excluded middle. These logical laws do not constitute a priori conditions 
for our thought. And the relationships contained in equating, separating, abstract-
ing, and relating reappear in the discursive logical operations as in the formal 
categories about which we will speak later. The assumption that judgment involves 
the supplementation of the categorial relationship of a thing and its properties is 
unnecessary, because it can be understood on the basis of the relation between an 
object and that which is predicated of it. (D) 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
1 53 
account of its methods belongs to the exposition of the formation 
r31 
of the human sciences. I shall begin with two terminological clari-
fications: by "psychic life-units" I mean the constituents of the 
socio-historical world; by "psychic structure" I designate the 
nexus in which various functions are connected within the psychic 
life-unit. 
1. LIFE 
The human sciences rely on the relationship between lived experi-
ence, expression, and understanding. Their development depends 
as much on probing the depth of lived experiences as on increas-
ing efforts to extract their contents. At the same time, the develop-
ment of the human sciences is dependent on extending under-
standing to all objectifications of spirit and on the ever more 
complete and methodical extraction of the spiritual content from 
the various manifestations of life. 
What we grasp through lived experience and understanding is 
life as it encompasses the human race. When we first confront this 
vast fact, which we consider the starting point not only for the 
human sciences but also for philosophy, we must go behind its 
scientific elaboration and grasp life in its natural state. 
Wherever the life of the human world presents itself to us, we 
also see its manifestations in particular life-units, that is, in their 
life-concerns, in their conduct and stance toward things and peo-
ple, and in the suffering created by them. This enduring subsoil of 
life, from which differentiated functions arise, contains nothing 
that is not also a life-concern of a self. Just as everything is related 
to the self, the state of the self changes constantly in accordance 
with how things and people relate to it. There are no people or 
things that are merely objects to me, that do not involve pressure 
or furtherance, the goal of some striving or a restriction on my 
will; they are either already important to me or demand my con-
sideration; they are either close to me or distant, resistant, and 
strange. This life-concern, whether it be limited to a given moment 
or lasting, makes me see these people and things either as bearers 
of happiness, expanding my existence and heightening my powers, 
or as restricting the scope of my existence, bringing pressure to 
bear on me and diminishing my powers. And just as there are 
predicates that can only be assigned to things on the basis of this 
life-concern of mine, so it produces corresponding changes in my 
condition. From this subsoil of life, objective apprehension, eval-
r32 
154 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
uation, and the positing of purposes emerge as types of attitude 
with countless nuances that merge into each other. In the course of 
a life, they are connected as inner systems that embrace and deter-
mine all activity and development. 
We can illustrate this by the way in which the lyrical poet ex-
presses lived experience; he starts from a situation and allows us 
to see how human beings and things relate to the life-concern of 
an ideal ego in whom his own existence and the course of his lived 
experiences are imaginatively heightened; this life-coneern deter-
mines what the genuine lyrical poet sees and expresses about hu-
mans, things, and himself. Similarly, the epic poet can only tell us 
what follows from some exhibited life-concern. When the histo-
rian depicts historical situations and persons, he will be all the 
more effective in arousing a strong impression of real life the more 
he reveals about such life-concerns. He must accentuate those 
characteristics of humans and things that are prominent and active 
in these life-concerns- he must, I would say, give persons, things, 
and events the shape and color of the perceptions and memories to 
which they gave rise in life itself. 
2. LIFE-EXPERIENCE 
Objective apprehension proceeds in time and therefore already 
contains memory afterimages. Since, with the advance of time, 
that which has been experienced constantly grows and recedes 
ever more, memories of our own life-course are formed. In the 
same way, the understanding of other people produces memories 
of their states and existential images of various situations. In all 
these memories, some state of being is linked with its milieu of 
external states of affairs, events, and persons. An individual's life-
experience results from the generalization of what has thus accu-
mulated. It arises through procedures that are equivalent to induc-
tion. The number of instances on which the induction is based 
constantly increases in the course of a lifetime, and the generaliza-
tions formed are constantly corrected. The certainty attributable 
to personal life-experience differs from the universal validity of 
science, for these generalizations are not arrived at methodically 
and cannot be reduced to fixed formulas. 
The individual perspective involved in personal life-experience is 
r 3 3 
corrected and broadened by general life-experience. By this I mean 
the beliefs generated amidst a sphere of persons living together 
and that are shared by them. These are assertions about the course 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
I 55 
of life, value judgments, rules of the conduct of life, determina-
tions about purposes and goods. Their hallmark is that they are 
the products of common or shared life. They influence the life of 
individuals as much as that of communities. On the one hand, 
they exert power over the specific life-experience and conduct of 
individuals through custom, tradition, and public opinion. Be-
cause the community has the weight of numbers behind it and 
outlasts the individual life-will, its power usually proves superior. 
The reliability of this general life-experience increasingly exceeds 
that of personal life-experience the more that individual points of 
view cancel each other out and the more that the number of cases 
accumulate on which its inductions rely. On the other hand, with 
this general experience, there is even less opportunity to control 
the genesis of its knowledge of life than with individual experience. 
3. DIFFERENT LIFE-ATTITUDES AND THE ASSERTIONS OF LIFE-EXPERIENCE 
Life-experience includes various assertions that are based on dif-
ferent life-attitudes. For life is the source of knowledge not merely 
by supplying the content of experience; typical human kinds of 
life-attitude also condition the various kinds of assertion. For the 
moment, I merely want to affirm the existence of this relation be-
tween the various life-attitudes and the assertions of life-experience. 
From the specific factual life-concerns that relate the self to 
things and other humans, particular states of life emerge: differen-
tiated states of the self, feelings of the diminution or intensification 
of one's existence, desire for an object, fear, or hope. And as things 
or human beings that make a demand on the self come to occupy 
a place in its existence, become sources of assistance or hindrance, 
objects of desire, striving, or aversion, these life-concerns allow us 
to also characterize things and people in ways that supplement our 
apprehension of reality. All these determinations of self, things and 
others, as they emerge from these life-concerns, are raised to the 
r34 
level of reflection and expressed in language. Thus we come to 
distinguish between factual assertion, wish, exclamation, and im-
perative. A survey of the expressions used for the kinds of atti-
tudes of the self toward others and things shows that they fall into 
certain main classes. They establish what is real, they evaluate, 
they designate a positing of a purpose, they formulate a rule, or 
they articulate the meaning of a fact in the wider context into 
which it is interwoven. We can show the following relations be-
tween these kinds of assertions contained in life-experience: ap-
I 56 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
prehensions of reality form a layer on which valuations rest; the 
layer of valuations, in turn, serves as a substratum for the setting 
of purposes. 
The kinds of attitude involved in life-concerns and their prod-
ucts are objectified in assertions that confirm the reality of these 
attitudes. It is equally the case that the characterizations of human 
beings and things become independent of the life-concerns from 
which they stem. These facts are then raised to a general knowl-
edge of life in life-experience by a procedure equivalent to induc-
tion. This is the origin of the many kinds of assertions that take 
the form of proverbs, maxims, and reflections about passions, 
characters, and values of life in generalizing folk wisdom and in 
literature. These forms again manifest the distinctions noted in the 
expressions of our stances or kinds of attitude. 
The assertions of life-experience manifest even further differ-
ences. The cognition of reality, evaluation, the giving of rules, and 
the setting of purposes are each differentiated into various levels in 
life itself, where each level presupposes the others. We have al-
ready pointed to such levels in objective apprehension, but they 
also exist in the other kinds of attitude. Thus estimating the prac-
tical value of things or people presupposes that we have already 
become aware of the capacity of objects to be useful or harmful. 
Likewise, a decision only becomes possible when we have consid-
ered how representations of a goal relate to reality and what means 
are available in the latter to help actualize these representations. 
4. IDEAL UNITS AS CARRIERS OF LIFE AND OF LIFE-EXPERIENCE 
The individual existence of single persons unfolds into an infinite 
richness of life on the basis of their concerned relations to their 
13 5 
environment, to other people, and to things. But each individual is 
also a point of intersection of systems that penetrate both it [and 
other] individuals, that exist within them, but that also reach be-
yond their life. These systems possess an independent existence 
and development of their own through the contents, values, and 
purposes that they realize. Thus they are subjects of an ideal kind. 
A kind of knowledge of reality is inherent in these systems; per-
spectives of evaluation develop within them; purposes are realized 
in them; they possess a meaning that they assert in the context of 
the world of human spirit. 
This is already the case in some of the systems of culture- for 
instance, art and philosophy- where there is generally no over-
arching organization to link their parts. But organized associations 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
157 
also develop. Economic life produces companies; science creates 
centers for the fulfillment of its tasks; religions develop the most 
enduring of organizations among the cultural systems. The highest 
development of common goals within a community is found in the 
family, in the state, and in the various intermediate forms between 
them. 
Each organized unit of a state develops a cognizance of itself, 
such as of the rules on which its existence is founded and of its 
place in the whole. It enjoys the values that have been cultivated in 
its domain; it realizes the purposes that are essential to it and that 
serve to maintain and further its existence. It is itself a human 
good and realizes goods. Within the human whole it has its own 
meanmg. 
We have now reached the point where society and history un-
fold before us. It would be a mistake, however, to confine history 
to the cooperation of human beings for common purposes. A sin-
gle person in his seemingly self-reliant existence is already a histor-
ical being. He is determined by his position in the time line, his 
place in space, his role in the cooperation of cultural systems and 
communities. The historian must, therefore, understand the whole 
life of an individual as it manifests itself at a specific time and 
place. It is the overall continuum proceeding from individuals-
insofar as they aim at the development of their own existence- to 
cultural systems and communities and, finally, to humanity at 
large that constitutes the character of society and history. Individ-
uals, as much as communities and systems, are the logical subjects 
of history. 
5. THE EMERGENCE OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES FROM THE LIFE OF 
136 
INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITI/i.S 
Life, life-experience, and the human sciences are intimately related 
and constantly interact. The basis of the human sciences is not 
conceptualization but the reflexive awareness of a psychic state in 
its wholeness and its rediscovery in re-experiencing. Here life 
grasps life, and the power with which these two elementary tasks 
of the human sciences are fulfilled is a necessary precondition for 
the perfection of every aspect of these sciences. 
Here we notice a decisive difference between the natural sci-
ences and the human sciences. In the former, scientific thinking 
stands apart from our ordinary contact with the external world, 
rendering its productive achievements esoteric. But in the human 
sciences, a connection between life and science is retained, so that 
158 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
the thought-provoking work of everyday life remains the founda-
tion of scientific creativity. In certain circumstances of everyday 
life, there can be a self-transparency that surpasses the power of a 
Carlyle and a virtuosity in the understanding of others that even 
Ranke cannot equal. On the one hand, great religious person-
alities, like Augustine and Pascal, provide the eternal exemplars of 
life-experience based on personal lived experience. On the other 
hand, the intrigues of court and politics serve the understanding of 
other people by training us in the art of looking behind outward 
appearances. A man of action such as Bismarck, who is by nature 
aware of his goals whenever he writes a letter or conducts a con-
versation, cannot be rivaled in the art of reading intentions behind 
an expression by any interpreter of political documents or critic of 
historical accounts. In many cases, there is no real difference be-
tween a poetically sensitive listener's conception of a play and the 
most excellent literary-historical analysis. Also, concept-formation 
in the historical and social sciences is continuously determined by 
life itself. I see a continuum that constantly leads from life, from 
conceptions of fate, character, passion, value, and the purpose of 
existence, to history as a science. There was a time in France when 
political influence was based more on a familiarity with people 
and leading personalities than on a scientific study of law, eco-
nomics, and politics. During this period, when one's position in 
the life of the court depended on cultivating this familiarity, the 
137 
literary form of memoirs and writings about characters and pas-
sions reached a height they have never attained again, even though 
they were produced by people who were very little influenced by 
the scientific study of psychology and history. There is a contin-
uum that links these observations of high society to the writers 
and poets who learn from them, and the systematic philosophers 
and scientific historians who are educated by poetry and literature. 
We see in the beginnings of political science in ancient Greece how 
concepts of constitutions and their political -functions originate 
from the life of the state itself so that new creations in it lead to 
new theories. This relation is clearest in the earlier stages of juris-
prudence among the Romans and Teutons. 
6. THE RELATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES TO LIFE AND THE 
PROBLEM OF UNIVERSAL VALIDITY 
The first basic trait that defines the structure of the human sci-
ences is the fact that life is their starting point and abiding con-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
159 
text. The human sciences rely on lived experience, understanding, 
and life-experience. This direct relationship between life and the 
human sciences leads to a conflict in the human sciences between 
the aims of life and those of science. Insofar as historians, econo-
mists, teachers of law, and students of religion are involved in life, 
they want to influence it. They subject historical personages, mass 
movements, and tendencies to their judgment, which is influenced 
by their individuality, the nation to which they belong, and the age 
in which they live. Even when they think they are proceeding 
without any presuppositions, they are determined by their hori-
zon. Every analysis of the concepts of a past generation reveals 
constituents in them that derive from the presuppositions of that 
generation. Yet every science contains the demand for universal 
validity. If there are to be strictly scientific human sciences, they 
must aim ever more consciously and critically at this goal of uni-
versal validity. 
Many of the scientific controversies that have recently surfaced 
in the logic of the human sciences stem from the conflict between 
these two tendencies [of life and science]. Because this conflict 
manifests itself most strongly in history, it has become the focal 
point of its discussions. 
The resolution of this conflict will come only as the human sci-
r38 
ences undergo their formative development. However, the general 
statements that follow about the system of the human sciences 
already contain the principle for this resolution. We can reaffirm 
the results we have reached. Life and life-experience are the ever 
freshly flowing sources for understanding the socio-historical 
world. Starting with life, understanding penetrates into ever new 
depths; only by reacting back on life and society do the human 
sciences achieve their highest importance, an importance that is 
constantly increasing. But the road to such efficacy must pass 
through the objectivity of scientific cognition. The awareness of 
this already existed in the great creative epoch of the human sci-
ences. After many disturbances deriving from our national devel-
opment as well as from the employment of a one-sided ideal of 
culture since Jacob Burckhardt/' we are today filled with the striv-
ing to cultivate this objectivity of the human sciences critically, 
51 Jacob Burckhardt (r8r8-97), Swiss-German historian and art historian. Some 
of his most influential works are Kultur der Renaissance in ltalien, Griechische 
Kulturgeschichte, and Weltgeschichtliche Betrachtungen. The first of these is re-
viewed by Dilthey in SW 4, 271-77. 
139 
160 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
rigorously, and with ever fewer presuppositions. I find the princi-
ple for the resolution of the conflict within the human sciences in 
the understanding of the historical world as a productive nexus 
centered in itself, at the same time containing other productive 
systems within it, which by positing values and realizing purposes52 
also have their center within themselves. All are to be understood 
as structurally linked into a whole in which the sense of the nexus 
of the socio-historical world arises from the significance of the 
individual parts. Accordingly, every value judgment and every pur-
pose projected into the future must be grounded exclusively on 
these structural relationships. We will be approaching this ideal 
principle in the following general theses about the system of the 
human sciences. 
CHAPTER II: THE PROCEDURAL MODES IN WHICH THE 
WORLD OF HUMAN SPIRIT IS GIVEN 
The system of the human sciences is determined by their rooted-
ness in lived experience and understanding, both of which lead the 
human sciences to differ radically from the natural sciences and 
give the formation of the human sciences a character of its own. 
1. RE-PRESENTATIONS BASED ON LIVED EXPERIENCE 
Each optical image differs from the others referring to the same 
object in accordance with the perspective and conditions of appre-
hension. These images are connected into a system of inner rela-
tions by the various kinds of objective apprehension. The total 
representation that arises from the series of images in accordance 
with the basic relations involved in the state of affairs is something 
added by imagination or thought. By contrast, the lived experi-
ences of a human being refer to each other in a time sequence; 
each of them has a place in a sequence, the parts of which are 
linked by memory. Here I am not yet concerned with the problem 
of the reality of these lived experiences or with the difficulties in-
volved in their apprehension. It suffices to observe that the way in 
which a lived experience is there for me is completely different 
from the way in which images stand before me. The consciousness 
of a lived experience is one with its nature, its being-there-for-me 
and what in it is there for me are one. The lived experience does 
52 Reading "Werten" as "Zwecken." 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
r6r 
not stand over against an observer as an object, but its existence 
for me is indistinguishable from what in it is there for me. Here 
there are no different positions in space from which what is there 
in it could be seen. Different points of view from which to appre-
hend it can only arise afterwards through reflection and do not 
affect its character as lived experience. It is exempted from the 
relativity of what is given by the senses, according to which im-
ages can only be referred to what is objective through their rela-
tion to the observer, to his position in space and to what lies be-
tween him and the object. Thus starting with lived experience a 
direct line proceeds from re-presentations to the order of concepts 
by which lived experience is grasped in thought. Lived experience 
is first clarified by elementary operations of thought. In this re-
gard, the memories through which an experience is further appre-
hended have a special importance. And what happens when a 
lived experience becomes the object of my reflection? I lie awake 
at night and worry whether I shall be able, in old age, to complete 
the works that I have begun; I consider what is still to be done. 
This lived experience contains a structural nexus of consciousness: 
objective apprehension forms the background for an attitude of 
care and sadness about the objectively apprehended state of affairs 
as well as for a striving to get beyond it. All this is there for me as 
a structural nexus. I bring the whole situation to distinct con-
sciousness. I accentuate what has been structurally related, and 
140 
isolate it. All that I accentuate or highlight in this way is contained 
in the experience itself and is only being clarified. However, my 
apprehension of the lived experience is also pulled along to other 
lived experiences in the course of my life. These are lived experi-
ences that are structurally related to moments in the present expe-
rience, even though they may be separated by long stretches of 
time. From an earlier perusal, I know about my manuscripts. This 
is linked with memories going far back into the past when these 
manuscripts were begun. A different movement leads toward the 
future. These piles of paper will demand incalculable work from 
me. I am worried about it and prepare myself inwardly for the 
task. All this "about," "from," and "towards," all these relations 
of lived experience to what is remembered and to what lies in the 
future, pull me along both backwards and forwards. This being-
pulled-along occurs because living through an experience involves 
a sequence that demands ever new members. Interest, originating 
in the emotional power of lived experience, may also play its part. 
But it is a being-pulled-along, not a volition, least of all the ab-
I62 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
stract will to know from which dialectic has been derived ever 
since Schleiermacher. In the sequence that arises this way, the past, 
the future, and the possible transcend the experience-filled mo-
ment. But both what is past and what is futural [in this nexus] are 
related to the lived experience in a sequence that, through these 
relations, is articulated into a whole. Because remembering some-
thing past involves recognition, it must be structurally related to a 
prior lived experience as reproducing it. Future possibilities are 
also linked to the sequence by how it determines the range of what 
is possible. Thus through this process, it becomes possible to intuit 
the psychic nexus in the time frame that constitutes the course of a 
life. In this life-course, each particular lived experience is related 
to a whole. This life-nexus is not the sum or totality of successive 
moments but a unity constituted by relations that link all its parts. 
From the present, we survey a series of memories back to the 
point where our small, malleable, and unformed selves become 
lost in the twilight, and we press forward from the present to 
possibilities that are inherent in it, but assume vague and broad 
dimensions. 
All this has an important consequence for the system of the hu-
man sciences. The constituents, regularities, and relations that 
constitute awareness of the life-course are all contained in life it-
self; knowledge of the life-course is as real as knowledge of lived 
expenence. 
2. MUTUAL DEPENDENCE IN UNDERSTANDING 
Lived experiences present us with the reality of life in its manifold 
references, but the experiencing as such seems to only give us 
knowledge of something singular, namely, our own life. It remains 
knowledge of something unique, and no logical aid can overcome 
this limitation of lived experience, which is rooted in the way it is 
experienced. Understanding first overcomes this limitation of the 
individual lived experience and, at the same time, bestows the 
character of life-experience to personal lived experiences. Extend-
ing to various people, creations of human spirit, and communities, 
it widens the horizon of the individual life and, in the human sci-
ences, opens up the path that leads from the common to the 
universal. 
Mutual understanding assures us of what individuals have in 
common. Individuals are linked by a commonality that involves 
belonging together, continuity, similarity, and affinity. This same 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
relation of continuity and similarity pervades all spheres of the 
human world. This commonality is expressed in the selfsameness 
of reason, in sympathy as part of the life of feeling, and in the 
mutual commitments of duty and justice accompanied by a con-
sciousness of obligation. 
What human beings have in common is the starting point for all 
the relations between the particular and the universal in the hu-
man sciences. A basic experience of commonality permeates the 
whole conception of the world of human spirit. This experience 
connects the consciousness of a unitary self, that of similarity with 
others, the selfsameness of human nature and individuality. This is 
the presupposition for understanding. From an elementary inter-
pretation that only requires familiarity with the meaning of words 
and the regularities by which they are linked into sentences to 
make sense- commonality of language and thought- we see a 
constant widening of the scope of common conditions that allow 
the process of understanding to be extended to more complex 
combinations of objectifications of life. 
The analysis of understanding discloses a second basic relation-
ship that is decisive for the structure of the system of the human 
sciences. We have seen that the truths of the human sciences are 
based on lived experience and understanding; on the other hand, 
142 
understanding does presuppose the application of the truths of the 
human sciences. Let me illustrate this with an example. Suppose 
the task is to understand Bismarck. The available material consists 
of an extraordinary wealth of letters, documents, anecdotes, and 
reports about him. All this refers to the course of his life. But in 
order to understand what influenced this great statesman and 
what he achieved, the historian must expand the range of this ma-
terial. Indeed, as long as the process of understanding continues, 
the delimitation of relevant material cannot be concluded. Simply 
to recognize people, events, and circumstances as belonging to this 
productive system, the historian will need some general proposi-
tions. Thus his understanding of Bismarck will also be based on 
them. These general propositions extend in range from the com-
mon properties of human beings to the particular properties of 
special classes. From the perspective of individual psychology, the 
historian will place Bismarck among men of action, and in tracing 
out the traits common to such people, locate the combination that 
is distinctive of him. From another perspective, the historian will 
recognize in the sovereignty of his nature, in his habit of dominat-
ing and leading, and in his strong will the traits of the Prussian 
164 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
landed aristocracy. As his long life occupies a specific span in the 
course of Prussian history, another group of general statements 
must determine the features common to people of that age. The 
enormous pressures that the circumstances of his state exerted on 
its political self-confidence naturally evoked the most varied reac-
tions. To understand this requires general statements about the 
pressure that a situation exerts on a political whole and its mem-
bers and about their reaction. The degree of methodological re-
liability achieved in understanding all this depends on having de-
veloped general truths grounding this relationship. It now becomes 
clear that this great man of action, whose roots lay solely in Prus-
sia and its monarchy, must have experienced the external pressures 
exerted on Prussia in a special way. He had to assess internal ques-
tions about the constitution of the state mainly from the point of 
view of the power of the state. Because he was the point of in-
tersection of commonalities such as state, religion, and judiciary 
system, and because, as a historical personality, he was able to 
strongly influence and move one of these commonalities while at 
the same time working within it, the historian needs a general 
knowledge of these commonalities. In short, his understanding 
will reach its final perfection only by reference to the totality of all 
the human sciences. Every relation that must be elaborated in giv-
143 
ing a narrative account of this historic personality reaches the 
highest achievable reliability and distinctiveness only when defined 
by scientific concepts about specific domains. The relation be-
tween these domains is founded ultimately on an overall impres-
sion or intuition of the historical world. 
Thus our example has brought out the dual relationship implicit 
in understanding. Understanding presupposes experience, but lived 
experience only becomes life-experience if understanding leads us 
from the narrowness and subjectivity of experiencing into the re-
gion of the whole and the general. Moreover, the understanding 
of an individual personality, to be complete, requires systematic 
knowledge, while systematic knowledge is equally dependent on 
the vivid grasping of the individual life-unit. The conceptual cog-
nition of inorganic nature proceeds through a formation of sci-
ences in which the lower stratum is always independent of the one 
that it grounds; in the human sciences everything from the process 
of understanding onwards is determined by the relationship of 
mutual dependence. 
The historical course of the human sciences also shows this mu-
tual dependence. Historiography is always conditioned by the 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
knowledge of the systematic relationships interwoven into history, 
and grounding them more thoroughly determines the progress 
of historical understanding. Thucydides53 relied on the political 
knowledge that had arisen from the practice of the independent 
Greek states and on the constitutional doctrines that had devel-
oped in the period of the Sophists. Polybius54 assimilated both the 
entire political wisdom of the Roman aristocracy at the peak of its 
social and intellectual development and the study of Greek politi-
cal works from Plato to the Stoics. Linking the wisdom about 
matters of state developed in Florence and Venice by a sophisti-
cated upper class given to lively political debate with a renewal 
and development of classical theories made possible Machiavelli's55 
and Guicciardini's
56 historiography. The ecclesiastical history writ-
ten by Eusebius57 and the history written by the supporters and 
opponents of the Reformation, such as Neander' 8 and Ritschl,'9 
were full of systematic concepts about religion and church law. 
Finally, the formation of modern historiography is based, in the 
case of the Historical School, on relating the new science of juris-
prudence to experiences of a revolutionary age and, in the case of 
Hegel, on a systematization of newly developed human sciences. 
Ranke gives the appearance of facing reality with naive narrative 
I44 
abandon; nevertheless, his historiography can only be understood 
by tracing the manifold sources of systematic thought that con-
verged in his education. As we advance toward the present, this 
mutual dependence of the historical and the systematic increases. 
Even the great epoch-making achievements of historical criti-
cism have always been dependent not only on the formal develop-
ment of its method but also on a deeper grasp of systematic con-
'·1 Thucydides (died c. 40I B.c.), regarded as the first critical historian and as the 
greatest historian in antiquity; wrote the History of the Peloponnesian War. 
14 Polybius (c. 2oo-c. I I 8 B.c.), Greek historian; wrote Histories, a general his-
tory of Rome and surrounding countries from 22o-I46 B.C. 
" Niccolo Machiavelli ( 1469-I 52 7 ), Italian political philosopher. His most influ-
ential work, It principe, contains his theory of government and statecraft. 
'"Francesco Guicciardini i1483-I540), Florentine historian and politician; au-
thor of Storia d'Italia, a principal historical work of the sixteenth century. 
17 Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 260-c. 3 39 ), ecclesiastical historian; author of Histo-
ria ecclesiastica, a history of the church to 3 24; Chronicon, a universal history to 
303; Life of Constantine; and other theological works. 
"Johann August Wilhelm Neander (I789-I85o), German historian and 
theologian. 
59 Albrecht Ritschl (I 822-89 ), German theologian and founder of the Ritschlian 
school, which emphasized the ethical-social content of theology. 
166 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
texts- on advances in grammar, on the study of the context of 
speech first cultivated in rhetoric, and then on the modern concep-
tion of poetry (familiar to us from Wolf's predecessors who used a 
new poetics to draw conclusions about Homer). In Wolf himself, 
we see a dependence on the new aesthetic culture; in Niebuhr, on 
economic, juridical and political insights; in Schleiermacher, on a 
new philosophy, congenial to Plato; and in Baur,60 on an under-
standing, generated by Schleiermacher and Hegel, of the process in 
which dogmas arise. 
Conversely, the progress of the systematic human sciences has 
always been conditioned by our capacity to experience more deeply 
and to extend understanding to a wider range of expressions of 
historical life, by the disclosure of hitherto unknown historical 
sources, and by the emergence of ever new experiences with chang-
ing historical situations. This is already shown by the development 
of the first outlines of a political science in the age of the Sophists, 
Plato, and Aristotle, as well as the emergence of rhetorics and po-
etics as theories about what was being created in those times. 
It has always been the interplay between lived experience and 
the understanding of individual persons or of commonalities such 
as superindividual subjects that has produced the great advances 
in the human sciences. Geniuses of the art of narration such as 
Thucydides, Guicciardini, Gibbon,
61 Macaulay,62 or Ranke pro-
duced timeless historical works despite their individual limitations. 
Yet only the human sciences as a whole can produce progress. 
Insight into the systems that cooperate in history is gradually ap-
propriated by historical consciousness. History probes into the re-
lations among these systems that constitute a nation, an age, a line 
of historical development; at that point, the depths of life exhib-
145 
ited at particular points of history are again disclosed in a way 
that transcends all previous understanding. How could a past his-
torian's understanding of artists, poets, or writers ever be com-
pared with that of a current historian? 
6° Ferdinand Christian Baur (1792-1860), German theologian and scholar; 
founded Tiibingen school of biblical criticism, which was influenced by Hegel's 
metaphysics of history. 
61 Edward Gibbon (1737-94), English historian. His most famous work was The 
History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 
62 Thomas Babington Macaulay (18oo-1859), English writer and politician; au-
thor of History of England and Lays of Ancient Rome. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
3. THE GRADUAL ELUCIDATION OF THE OBJECTIFICATIONS OF LIFE 
THROUGH THE CONSTANT INTERACTION OF HISTORICAL 
AND SYSTEMATIC HUMAN SCIENCES 
The basic relationship between lived experience and understand-
ing that we have acknowledged is that of mutual dependence. 
More closely defined, it is one of gradual elucidation through the 
constant interaction of two classes of truths. The obscurity of ex-
perience is illuminated, the mistakes that arise from narrow con-
ceptions of the subject are corrected. Lived experience itself is ex-
panded and completed in the understanding of other persons, just 
as other people are understood through our own lived experi-
ences. Understanding constantly widens the range of historical 
knowledge by the more intensive use of sources, by re-examining a 
hitherto uncomprehended past, and, finally, by the advance of his-
tory itself, which produces ever new events and thus broadens the 
very object of understanding. This progression demands ever new 
general truths if this world of nonrecurring events is to be pene-
trated. At the same time, the extension of the historical horizon 
makes possible the formation of ever more general and fruitful 
concepts. Thus at every point and at every period in the project of 
the human sciences, there is an interplay between lived experience, 
understanding, and a general conceptual re-presentation of the 
world of human spirit. Every stage of this project possesses an 
inner unity in its conception of the world of human spirit. Because 
historical knowledge of the singular and [the articulation of] gen-
eral truths develop in interaction with each other, they become 
part of one integral point of view. At every stage, there is an im-
plicit understanding of the world of human spirit, from its general 
idea to methods of criticism and individual investigations, that is 
uniform or homogeneous. 
Here I would like to look back, once more, to the time when 
modern historical consciousness emerged. This occurred when the 
concept-formation of the systematic human sciences came to be 
consciously based on the study of historical life, and when knowl-
edge of the singular was permeated with an awareness of the sys-
tematic sciences of economics, law, politics, and religion. At this 
point, the overall order of the human sciences could be meth-
146 
odologically grasped. The same world of human spirit becomes 
the object of two classes of human sciences, each with its distinct 
approach. Universal history as the singular nexus whose object is 
r68 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
humanity and a system of independently constituted human sci-
ences dealing with human beings, language, economics, state, law, 
religion, and art supplement each other. They are distinguished by 
their goals and the methods determined by them, but, at the same 
time, they constantly cooperate in the formation of our knowledge 
of the world of human spirit. Starting with the basic achievement 
of understanding, experiencing and re-experiencing are linked 
with general truths. Concept-formation is not based on norms and 
values that transcend objective apprehension but arises from the 
tendency, governing all conceptual thought, to lift what is stable 
and lasting from the flux of events. Thus method moves in a dual 
direction. When directed at what is singular, it moves from the 
part to the whole and back from it to the part; when directed 
at the universal, the same reciprocity holds between it and the 
particular. 
CHAPTER III: THE OBJECTIFICATIONS OF LIFE 
When we grasp all the functions of understanding, we confront 
the objectifications of life as distinct from the subjectivity of lived 
experience. In addition to lived experience, observations about the 
objectivity of life, that is, of its externalization in manifold struc-
tural systems, become part of the foundation of the human sci-
ences. The individual, the communities, and the works into which 
life and spirit have entered form the outer realm of human spirit. 
These manifestations of life, as they present themselves to under-
standing in the external world, are embedded, as it were, in the 
context of nature. This great outer reality of human spirit always 
surrounds us. It is an actualization of human spirit in the world of 
the senses- from a fleeting expression to the rule of a constitution 
or code of law that lasts for centuries. Each single manifestation 
of life re-presents something common or shared in the realm of 
objective spirit. Every word or sentence, every gesture or polite 
formula, every work of art or political deed is intelligible because 
a commonality connects those expressing themselves in them and 
147 
those trying to understand them. The individual always experi-
ences, thinks, and acts in a sphere of commonality, and only in 
such a sphere does he understand. Everything that has been under-
stood carries, as it were, the mark of familiarity derived from such 
common features. We live in this atmosphere; it surrounds us con-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
stantly; we are immersed in it. We are at horne everywhere in this 
historical and understood world; we understand the sense and 
meaning of it all; we ourselves are woven into this common sphere. 
Because of the variety of life-manifestations to which we are 
exposed, we are constantly challenged to new understanding. How-
ever, in that each manifestation of life and its intelligibility is con-
nected with others, there is in understanding itself a being-pulled-
along by relations of affinity that leads from the given particular 
to the whole. As the relations between what is akin accumulate, 
the possibilities of generalizations, already implicit in common-
ality as a determination of what has been understood, also grow. 
Understanding brings out a further property of the objectifica-
tion of life, which defines both its articulation in terms of affinities 
and the movement toward generalization. The objectification of 
life encompasses a manifold of articulated spheres. From distinc-
tions of race down to the variety of expressions and customs in an 
ethnic group, even in a village, we find an articulation of spiritual 
differences that is influenced by nature. Other kinds of differentia-
tion emerge in cultural systems; still others separate periods from 
each other. In short, many lines that delimit areas of kindred life 
from some point of view or other, cross the world of objective 
spirit and intersect in it. The fullness of life manifests itself in in-
numerable nuances and can only be understood through the recur-
rence of these differences. 
Only through the idea of the objectification of life do we gain 
insight into the nature of the historical. Everything here derives 
from acts of human spirit and bears the hallmark of historicity. As 
a product of history, everything gets interwoven with the world 
of sense. The distribution of trees in a park, the arrangement of 
houses in a street, the handy tool of the artisan, and the sentence 
propounded in the courtroom are everyday examples of how we 
are constantly surrounded by what has become historical. What 
the human spirit is today projecting into some manifestation will 
tomorrow, when it stands before us, be history. Through the pas-
sage of time we become surrounded by Roman ruins, cathedrals, 
and the country palaces of autocrats. History is not something 
148 
separated from life or remote from the present. 
Let me summarize our results so far. The human sciences have 
the objectification of life as their comprehensive data. But once an 
objectification of life becomes something we understand, it in-
volves the relation of outer to inner throughout. Accordingly, this 
objectification is always related in understanding to lived experi-
170 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
ence through which a life-unit becomes aware of its own meaning-
content and capable of interpreting that of others. If this relation 
holds for the givens of the human sciences, then we see right away 
that the fixity and estrangement peculiar to the images of the 
physical world must be removed from our concept of givenness 
here. Everything given in the human sciences has been produced 
and thus is historical; it is understood and thus contains some-
thing common; it is familiar because understood. What is mani-
fold in this givenness is already ordered, and this order becomes 
the basis for interpreting life-manifestations through higher under-
standing. Thus the classification of the manifestations of life is 
already incipient in the givens of the human sciences. 
This completes our account of the concept of the human sci-
ences. The scope of the human sciences is identical with that of 
understanding, and understanding now has its unified material in 
the objectification of life. Thus the concept of the human sciences, 
in accordance with the range of the phenomena subsumable under 
it, is defined by the objectification of life in the external world. 
Human spirit can only understand what it has created. Nature, the 
subject-matter of the natural sciences, encompasses reality insofar 
as it has arisen independently of the efficacy of human spirit. Ev-
erything on which human beings have impressed their productive 
stamp forms the subject-matter of the human sciences. 
Thus the reference to spirit in the term Geisteswissenschaft (hu-
man science) receives its justification. Earlier we spoke of the spirit 
of the law, of justice, of the constitution. Now we can say that 
everything in which human spirit has objectified itself falls within 
the scope of the human sciences. 
2 
I have also called the objectification of life "objective spirit." The 
term is an insightful and happy coinage by Hegel. However, I must 
distinguish precisely and clearly the sense in which I use it from 
that which Hegel gave it. This difference concerns its systematic 
role as much as its function and its scope. 
149 
In Hegel's system, objective spirit designates a stage in the devel-
opment of the spirit. He places this stage between subjective and 
absolute spirit. Accordingly, the concept of objective spirit has for 
him a place in an ideal construction of the development of spirit 
that, although based on historical reality and on the relations that 
hold sway there, tries to speculatively comprehend them. For this 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
171 
very reason it leaves the temporal, empirical, and historical rela-
tions behind. The idea that externalizes itself into otherness in na-
ture, and thus steps outside itself, returns on the basis of this 
nature to itself in spirit. World-spirit regains its pure ideality. It 
realizes its freedom in its development. 
As subjective spirit, it is the manifold of individual spirits. Once 
the individual develops a will on the basis of the conceptual cogni-
tion of the rational purpose unfolding in the world, it makes a 
transition into freedom. This provides the basis for the philosophy 
of objective spirit, which shows how a free, rational, and therefore 
implicitly universal will objectifies itself in an ethical world: "Free-
dom, which aims at the content and purpose of freedom, is, in the 
first instance, merely a concept, a principle of the heart and spirit 
destined to develop into objectivity, into a legal, ethical, religious 
and scientific reality. " 63 This posits the development from objective 
to absolute spirit: "Objective spirit is the absolute idea, but only in 
itself; because in this way it stands on the ground of finitude, its 
real rationality retains the aspect of outward appearance. "64 
The objectification of spirit takes place in law, morality, and the 
ethical. The latter actualizes the universal, rational will in the fam-
ily, civil society, and the state. And the state actualizes its essence 
in world history as the outer reality of the ethical idea. 
· 
With this the ideal construction of the historical world has 
reached the point where the two stages of spirit, the universal ra-
tional will of the individual and its objectification in the ethical 
world as its higher unity, make possible the last and highest stage: 
spirit's knowledge of itself as the creative power of all reality in 
art, religion, and philosophy. "The subjective and the objective 
spirit are to be looked on as the road on which" the highest reality 
150 
of spirit, absolute spirit, "rises to maturity. " 65 
What was the historical status and content of this concept of 
objective spirit discovered by Hegel? The much misunderstood 
German Enlightenment had recognized the importance of the state 
as the all-embracing community through which the inherent ethi-
cal nature of individuals is actualized. Not since the days of the 
Greeks and Romans had the understanding of state and law been 
expressed as powerfully and profoundly as by the leading officials 
"l Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Philosophic des Geistes, in Werke, vol. 7, sec. 
2 (1845), p. 375· (D) 
64 Hegel, Philosophic des Geistes, in Werke, vol. 7, sec. 2, p. 376. (D) 
61 Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, trans. from The Encyclopaedia of the Philosophi-
cal Sciences by William Wallace (Oxford: Clarendon Press, r894), p. 167. 
172 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
of Frederick's state, namely, Carmer/6 Svarez,
67 Klein/
8 Zedlitz/
9 
and Herzberg. 
70 Their views of the nature and value of the state 
were linked by Hegel to the ideas of antiquity about ethics and the 
state, and to his sense of how these ideas were actualized in the 
ancient world. As a result, the historical significance of common 
perspectives was validated. At the same time, the Historical School 
discovered the same communal spirit that Hegel had found through 
a peculiar kind of metaphysical-historical insight, but by way of 
historical research. This school also attained a better understand-
ing than the Greek idealist philosophers that the essence of com-
munity in ethics, state, law, and faith is not derivable from coop-
eration among individuals. Here we see the dawn of historical 
consciousness in Germany. 
Hegel concentrated the result of this whole movement in one 
concept-that of objective spirit. 
Today we can no longer embrace the presuppositions on which 
Hegel based this concept. He constructed communities from the 
universal, rational will. Today we must start from the reality of 
life in which the totality of the psychic nexus is active. Hegel con-
structs metaphysically; we analyze the given. The contemporary 
analysis of human existence fills us all with a sense of fragility, 
with the power of dark instincts, with the suffering caused by 
mysteries and illusions, and with the finitude shown by all tbat is 
living, even where the highest creations of communal life arise 
from it. Thus we cannot understand objective spirit through rea-
son, but must go back to the structural nexus of life-units that 
extends itself into communities. We cannot assign objective spirit 
' 6 Carmer, Johann Heinrich Casimir von (1720-1801), Prussian minister and ju-
rist, and last Great Chancellor under Frederick II; codified the Common Law and 
instituted law reforms. 
"
7 Svarez (Schwarz), Carl Gottlieb (1746-98), Prussian jurist and reformer. From 
1791 to 1792 taught law and politics to the Prussian crown prince (who later 
became Frederick William III). Collaborated with Carmer to codify the Common 
Law. 
6x Klein, Ernst Friedrich (1744-1810), jurist and high government official in 
Prussia. 
69 Zedlitz (Zedlitz-Leipe), Carl Abraham Freiherr von (17JI-1810), Prussian jus-
tice minister. Head of the Ecclesiastical Department from 1770 to 1788. Pursued 
the reform of higher education. Founded the provincial high school colleges and 
established the Abitur as the qualification for entry into the university. 
70 Herzberg (Hertzberg), Ewald Friedrich Graf von (1725-95). Suggested the 
designation of the two parts of Prussia as East Prussia and West Prussia- officially 
adopted in 1773. Helped to bring about the 1763 Peace of Hubertusburg. Served 
as Prussian Kabinettsminister from 1763 to 1791. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
1 73 
a place in an ideal construction, but must ground its reality in 
history. We will attempt to understand this historical reality and to 
explicate it in adequate concepts. Once objective spirit is extri-
cated from its one-sided foundation in a universal reason that ex-
presses the essence of world-spirit and from ideal constructions, a 
I 5 I 
new conception of it becomes possible that encompasses language, 
custom, every form and style of life, as well as family, civil society, 
state, and law. And what Hegel distinguished from objective spirit 
as absolute spirit, namely, art, religion, and philosophy, also falls 
under this same concept. Especially in art, religion, and philoso-
phy, the creative individual shows himself at the same time as rep-
resenting commonality. Human spirit objectifies itself in its power-
ful forms and is recognized in them. 
This objective spirit displays an articulation that extends from 
mankind down to the most narrowly defined types. This articula-
tion results from a principle of individuation. When something 
individual is made intelligible on the basis of, and by means of, the 
universally human, we re-experience the inner nexus that leads 
from the universal to its individuation. This development is grasped 
in reflection, and individual psychology projects the theory that 
grounds the possibility of individuation. 71 
The systematic human sciences are based on the same set of 
fundamental uniformities and the individuation that emerges from 
them. Accordingly, they depend on general theories and compara-
tive procedures. General truths established by these human sci-
ences about ethical life or poetry thus become the foundation for 
insight into differences concerning moral ideals or poetic creativity. 
The past in which the great, overall forces of history took shape 
becomes a present reality in objective spirit. Individuals, as car-
riers and representatives of the commonalities interwoven in them, 
can appreciate and grasp the historical genesis of these common-
alities. Individuals can understand history because they themselves 
are historical beings. 
The concept of objective spirit developed in this work diverges 
from that of Hegel in one final way. Because I replace Hegel's 
universal reason by life in its totality (lived experience, under-
standing, historical context, and power of the irrational), the 
problem of how scientific history is possible arises. For Hegel this 
problem did not exist. His metaphysics (in which world-spirit is 
71 See my treatise "Contributions to the Study of Individuality" ( r 89 5-96) GS V, 
24I-3 r6 (D), SW 2. 
174 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
inherently identical with nature as its externalization, with objec-
tive spirit as its actualization, and with absolute spirit, culminating 
152 
in philosophy, as the realization of the knowledge of it) has left 
this problem behind. But today the task is the reverse- to recog-
nize what is given in historical objectifications as the true founda-
tion of historical knowledge and to find a method of answering 
the question how universally valid knowledge of the historical 
world is possible on the basis of this given. 
CHAPTER IV: THE WORLD OF HUMAN SPIRIT 
AS A PRODUCTIVE NEXUS 
Through lived experience and the understanding of the objectifica-
tions of life, the world of human spirit becomes accessible to us. It 
is now our task to define more closely the nature of this world-
the historical as well as the social world- as the object of the 
human sciences. 
Let us first summarize the results of the preceding investigations 
about the system of the human sciences. It is based on the rela-
tionship between lived experience and understanding from which 
three main principles have emerged. Our knowledge of what is 
given in lived experience is extended through the interpretation of 
the objectifications of life, and this interpretation, in turn, is possi-
ble only on the basis of the subjective depth of lived experience. 
Likewise, the understanding of what is singular depends on the 
general knowledge inherent in it, which, in turn, presupposes un-
derstanding. Finally, the understanding of a part of the historical 
course of events can attain completeness only through relating -this 
part to the whole, just as the universal-historical survey of the 
whole presupposes the understanding of the parts united in it. 
This results in a reciprocal dependence of the way we appre-
hend each particular state of affairs of the human sciences within 
the communal, historical whole of which it is a part and of the 
way we grasp the conceptual re-presentation of this whole in the 
systematic human sciences. In the progress of the human sciences, 
we see at every point the reciprocal influence of lived experience 
and understanding as we apprehend the human world [around us], 
then the reciprocal dependence of universal and singular knowl-
edge, and finally the gradual illumination of the world of human 
spirit. Therefore we find tbis again in all the operations that pro-
vide the general basis for the structure of the human sciences. We 
will have to acknowledge the interdependence of interpretation, 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
175 
criticism, the combining of sources, and the synthesis of a histori-
cal context. 
A similar interdependence can be shown in developing subject-
terms such as "economics," "law," "philosophy," "art" and "reli-
153 
gion," that designate the productive systems whereby different 
persons aim at a common task. In scientific concept-formation, the 
determination of the marks that constitute the concept presup-
poses that we first establish which states of affairs are to be gath-
ered in the concept. But to establish and select these states of af-
fairs requires marks by which we confirm whether or not they 
belong to the scope of the concept. To define the concept of po-
etry, I must extract it from everything that constitutes its denota-
tion; and to ascertain which works belong to poetry, I must al-
ready possess a mark by which a work can be recognized as poetical. 
This relationship is, therefore, the most general feature of the 
structure of the human sciences. 
1. THE GENERAL CHARACTER OF THIS PRODUCTIVE NEXUS 
OF THE WORLD OF HUMAN SPIRIT 
Our resulting task is to conceive the world of human spirit as a 
productive nexus or as a totality constituted by its enduring prod-
ucts. This productive nexus and its creations are the subject 
matter of the human sciences. They analyze it [ r] as itself a pro-
ductive system or [2] as it exhibits itself in stable formations or 
structures with their respective logical, aesthetical, or religious sys-
tems or [3] as [its products], such as a state constitution or a legal 
text, and how they point back to the productive nexus from which 
they arose. 
This productive nexus of the world of human spirit is distin-
guished from the causal nexus of nature by the fact that, in accor-
dance with the structure of psychic life, it produces values and 
realizes purposes; and this occurs not occasionally, not here and 
there; rather, it lies in the very structure of human spirit to estab-
lish a productive system that generates values and realizes pur-
poses on the basis of objective apprehension. I call this the im-
manent teleological character of the productive nexus of human 
spirit. By this I mean a system of functions based on the structure 
of a productive nexus. Historical life is creative. It is constantly 
active in generating goods and values, and all concepts about them 
are merely reflections of this activity. 
The carriers of this constant creation of values and goods in the 
I76 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
world of human spirit are individuals, communities, and the cul-
r 54 
tural systems in which individuals cooperate. This cooperation is 
determined by the fact that, in order to realize values, individuals 
subject themselves to rules and set themselves purposes. All these 
modes of cooperation manifest a life-concern connected to the hu-
man essence and that links individuals with each other- a core, as 
it were, that cannot be grasped psychologically but is revealed in 
every such system of relations among human beings. The produc- · 
tivity of such a system is determined by the structural connections 
between objective apprehension, the psychic states expressed in 
valuation, and those expressed in positing purposes, goods, and 
norms. Such a productive system operates primarily in individuals. 
They are the points of intersection for systems of relations, each of 
which is a lasting carrier that exerts influence. Consequently, in 
each such carrier, communal goods and the regular procedures for 
realizing them emerge and are accepted as unconditionally valid. 
In every lasting relation among individuals values, rules and pur-
poses are developed, brought to consciousness, and consolidated 
by reflection. This creative activity, which occurs in individuals, 
communities, cultural systems, and nations under natural condi-
tions that constantly provide material and stimulation for it, at-
tains reflective awareness of itself in the human sciences. 
In accordance with the nature of the structural system, each 
spiritual unit has its center within itself. Like the individual, each 
cultural system, each community, has its own center. In each, ap-
prehension of reality, evaluation, and the generation of goods are 
linked into a whole. 
But a new fundamental relationship emerges from the produc-
tive system that is the subject matter of the human sciences. The 
different carriers of creative activity are integrated into broader 
socio-historical contexts; these are nations, ages, historical pe-
riods. In this way more complex forms of historical connectedness 
develop. The values, purposes, and obligations that are exhibited 
in these forms, carried and sustained by individuals, communities, 
and systems of relations, need to be comprehended by the histo-
rian. He compares them, brings out what is common to them, and 
synthesizes the various productive systems. From the way that 
each historical unity is centered in itself, a new form of unity can 
be shown to emerge. The individuals, cultural systems, and com-
r 55 
munities that are active and interactive at the same time produce a 
constant spiritual interchange that allows one life to be completed 
by the lives of others; nations already live in a relatively more self-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
177 
contained manner and, because of this, have their own horizons; 
but if I now consider the period of the Middle Ages, I find its 
horizon to be separate from that of previous periods. Even where 
the results of these periods persist, they are assimilated into the 
system of the medieval world, which has a closed horizon. Thus 
an epoch is centered in itself in a new sense. The individual per-
sons of an epoch find the norm for their activities in something 
common. The various productive systems that make up the social 
life of an epoch display similar structural features. The ways in 
which objects are apprehended derive an inner affinity from an 
epoch. The way humans feel, their emotions and the impulses that 
arise from them, are similar to each other. The will too chooses 
commensurate goals, strives for kindred goods, and finds itself 
committed in a related way. It is the task of historical analysis to 
find in the concrete purposes, values, and ways of thinking of an 
epoch a concordance about something common that governs it. 
Even the contrasts are determined by this common background. 
Thus each action, each thought, each common creation, in short, 
each part of this historical whole, has its significance through its 
relationship to the whole of the epoch or age. And when the his-
torian passes judgment, he ascertains what the individual has 
achieved within this context and how far his vision and deeds may 
have extended beyond it. 
We must consider the historical world as a whole, this whole as 
a productive system, and this system in turn as positing values and 
purposes, namely, as creative. Similarly, we must understand this 
whole from within itself and its values and purposes as centered in 
ages, in epochs, in a universal history. These are the perspectives in 
terms of which the system of the human sciences to which we 
aspire must be conceived. The scientific tendency toward universal 
validity has as a consequence that the direct ways in which a life-
concern, its values, and its purposes refer to some historical object 
are replaced with the experience of immanent relations among 
productive forces, values, purposes, meaning, and sense within the 
productive nexus of the historical world. Only on the basis of such 
objective history does the problem arise whether and to what ex-
tent it is possible to predict the future and to subordinate our lives 
to the common goals of mankind. 
At first the comprehension of a productive nexus occurs in the 
156 
experiencing subject for whom the sequence of inner events un-
folds in structural relations. Such a nexus is then rediscovered in 
other individuals through understanding. The fundamental form 
178 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
of a productive system arises in the individual who gathers to-
gether the present, the past, and possibilities of the future in a life-
course. Such a life-course recurs in the course of history into which 
[it and other] life-units are integrated. When the broader connec-
tions of an occurrence are observed by a spectator or reported in a 
narrative, a conception of historical events arises. Particular events 
occupy a position in the course of time that at every point presup-
poses an influence from the past and has consequences that reach 
into the future. Thus everything that happens demands further de-
velopment, and the present leads beyond itself into the future. 
Other kinds of connectedness exist in works that, separated 
from their authors, have their own life and are a law unto them-
selves. Before we arrive at the productive system in which they 
originated, we must grasp the relations that are there in the com-
pleted work. The logical nexus that links legal principles into a 
code of law emerge in understanding. When we read one of Shake-
speare's comedies, we find that the component parts of what hap-
pens, which are already related by time and influence, are brought 
to a higher unity in accordance with the laws of poetical composi-
tion; this unity lifts a beginning and end out of the productive 
course of things and links its parts into a whole. 
2. THE PRODUCTIVE SYSTEM AS A FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
In the human sciences, we grasp the world of human spirit in the 
form of productive systems as they arise over the course of time. 
Efficacy, energy, passage of time, and process are the moments 
that concept-formation in the human sciences must characterize. 
But the universal function of a concept in the ideational nexus 
of the human sciences requires determinacy and constancy in all 
judgments and must remain independent of these moments of con-
tent. The marks that combine to give a concept its content must 
meet the same requirements. And the propositions into which con-
cepts are linked may not contain contradictions either within or 
among themselves. This timeless validity existing in the ideational 
nexus and determining the form of concepts has nothing to do 
r 57 
with the fact that the content of concepts in the human sciences 
can re-present the passage of time, efficacy, energy, and process. 
We see in the structure of the individual a tendency or impetus 
that communicates itself to all more composite forms ofthe world 
of human spirit. In that world collective forces emerge that affect 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
179 
the historical nexus in a particular direction. All the concepts of 
the human sciences, insofar as they re-present some constituent of 
a productive system, contain this character of process, passage, 
something happening, or action. Even when we analyze objec-
tifications of spiritual life as something finished and, as it were, at 
rest, we still need to grasp the productive system from which these 
objectifications originated. So, to a large extent, the concepts of 
the human sciences are fixed re-presentations of something in pro-
cess, a pinning down in thought of what is itself in passage or 
moving in a certain direction. Nevertheless, the systematic human 
sciences have the task of forming concepts that express life's inher-
ent tendency, its changeability and restlessness but, above all, the 
purposes that life sets for itself and fulfills. The historical and sys-
tematic human sciences have the further task to cultivate these 
relations conceptually. 
It was Hegel's contribution to have tried in his logic to give 
expression to the restless stream of events. But he was mistaken 
when he thought that this could not be reconciled with the princi-
ple of contradiction; insoluble contradictions only arise if one 
wants to explain the flow of life. It was and is equally mistaken to 
reject, on the basis of the same presupposition, the possibility of 
forming systematic concepts for the historical sphere. As a conse-
quence, the manifold nature of historical life is impoverished and 
fossilized by Hegel's dialectical method, whereas opponents of sys-
tematic conceptualization in the historical sphere drown in un-
re-presentable depths of life. 
At this point, one can understand what Fichte intended when he 
claimed that the ego deeply absorbed in itself discovers itself not 
as substance, being, or event but as life, activity, and energy. He 
was also able to develop concepts for the energy of the historical 
world. 
3. THE PROCEDURE: FOR ESTABLISHING PARTICULAR PRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS 
r58 
A productive system as such is always complex. To establish such 
a system, we start with a single effect for which we then seek the 
productive moments by going back step by step. Of the many pos-
sible factors, only a limited number can be determined and shown 
to be relevant to the effect. If, for example, we are looking for the 
interrelated causes that allowed German literature to move be-
yond the Enlightenment, we must distinguish the various causes, 
attempt to rank their weight. At some point we must delimit the 
180 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
infinite causal nexus in the light of the significance of these factors 
and our purpose. Thus we- bring to the fore a productive system to 
explain the change in question. On the other hand, we can sepa-
rate out from the concrete productive system special systems based 
on methodical analysis and in accordance with various perspec-
tives. It is this kind of analysis that really makes possible genuine 
progress in the systematic human sciences and in history. 
Our knowledge of a productive system arises mainly from the 
following procedures or their equivalents: from induction, which 
ascertains facts and causal moments; from synthesis, which with 
the help of induction links them into causal chains; from analysis, 
which separates out special productive systems; and from compar-
ison. We use the same methods when we study the lasting cre-
ations that have emerged from such productive systems: pictures, 
statues, plays, philosophic systems, religious writings, and legal 
books. Each has its characteristic connectedness, but here too 
analysis of the complete work on the basis of induction must be 
counterbalanced by synthetic reconstruction of the whole, again 
on the basis of induction, and with constant awareness of general 
truths. This theoretical interest of the human sciences in system-
atic connectedness is related to another mode of inquiry that pro-
ceeds from the particular to the general and back to search for 
regularities in productive systems. Here we find the most encom-
passing reciprocal dependence among procedures: Generalizations 
serve the formation of systematic connectedness, and the analysis 
of concrete and universal systems into special systems is the most 
fruitful path to the discovery of general truths. 
159 
When we look at the procedure for establishing productive sys-
tems in the human sciences, we see a great difference from the 
natural sciences. What has enabled the natural sciences to be so 
enormously successful is that they are based on the spatial system 
of phenomena. The discovery of exact universal laws becomes 
possible because what is extended and movable in space can be 
counted and measured. But the inner dynamic system [of the natu-
ral sciences] is added by thought, and its ultimate elements cannot 
be observed. On the other hand, the ultimate units of the histori-
cal world are, as we have seen, given to us in lived experience and 
understanding. Their unitary character is based on a structural 
nexus in which objective apprehension, values, and purposes are 
related to each other. The lived experience of this characteristic 
of a life-unit is such that only what is posited by its will can 
be a purpose, only what has proved itself in its thoughts is true, 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
r8r 
and only what is positively related to its feelings is valuable for it. 
The correlate of this life-unit is a body, moving and activated by 
inner impulses. The human-socio-historical world consists of these 
psychophysical life-units. This can be shown reliably through 
analysis. These life-units exhibit a productive system with special 
characteristics that are not exhausted by the relations of unity 
and multiplicity, whole and part, composition and reciprocal 
action. 
We can further conclude that the psychological life-unit is a pro-
ductive system that has the advantage over nature of being accessi-
ble to lived experience. However, the intensity of its productive 
constituents cannot be measured, only estimated, and its individu-
ality cannot be divorced from the universally human. As a conse-
quence, humanity is merely an indeterminate type. Therefore, every 
single psychic state involves a new stance of the whole life-unit, 
rooted in its overall concern for things and people. Since every 
manifestation of life emanating from a community or belonging to 
a cultural system is the product of cooperating life-units, the con-
stituents of such composite products have a corresponding charac-
ter. However much every psychic process belonging to such a 
whole may be determined by the goal of the productive system, it 
is never entirely determined by it. The individual in whom it takes 
place can intervene in the productive system, and the outcome 
shows the efficacy of the whole individual. Nature has been sepa-
r6o 
rated into different, homogeneous systems by the differentiation of 
the senses, each of which is uniform. The same object, such as a 
bell, is hard, bronze-colored, and capable of producing a range of 
sounds when struck; each of its properties assumes a place in one 
of the systems of sense apprehension, but we are not given an 
inner nexus or system linking these properties. However, when I 
have a lived experience, I am presented to myself as a continuum. 
Every changed state produces a new overall life-stance. Similarly, 
the whole of life discloses itself in any life-manifestation that be-
comes intelligible to us. This is why neither lived experience nor 
understanding presents us with homogeneous systems in which it 
is possible to discover laws of change. Understanding reveals com-
monalities and affinities as well as innumerable nuances of differ-
entiation ranging from the great differences among races, tribes, 
and nations to the infinite variety of individuals. Whereas in the 
natural sciences laws of change predominate, in the world of hu-
man spirit we are predominantly concerned with the comprehen-
sion of individuality- from that of the single person to humanity 
182 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
as an individual. It is the task of the comparative method to give 
conceptual order to this variety of individuality. 
These relationships define the limits of the human sciences, both 
of psychology and the systematic disciplines. Later methodological 
considerations will have to deal with them in detail. Speaking gen-
erally, it is clear that psychology and the particular systematic dis-
ciplines will have a predominantly descriptive and analytical char-
acter. Here my earlier discussions of the analytical method in 
psychology and in the systematic human sciences are relevant, and 
I refer to them in their entirety. 72 
4. UNDERSTANDING HISTORY THROUGH THE SYSTEMATIC HUMAN SCIENCES 
The conceptual cognition of the human sciences comes about, as 
we saw, through the interdependence of history and systematic 
161 
disciplines. And as the intention to understand always precedes 
conceptualization, we will start with the general properties of his-
torical knowledge. 
HISTORICAL KNOWLEDGE 
The comprehension of the productive nexus formed by history is 
at first generated from individual points at which related remnants 
of the past are linked in understanding through their relation to 
life-experience: what is close to us helps us to understand what is 
distant and past. The condition needed for this interpretation of 
historical remnants is that what we transfer into them must be 
characteristics that possess constancy over time and a general hu-
man validity. Thus we transpose our familiarity with customs, 
habits, political relations, and religious processes. Ultimately, 
transposition always presupposes the connections that the histo-
rian has experienced within himself. The germinal cell of the his-
torical world is the lived experience in which the subject discovers 
itself in a productive life-nexus with its environment. This envi-
ronment, which consists of the physical and cultural surroundings, 
acts on the subject and the subject acts on it. In every part of the 
historical world there exists, therefore, the same productive con-
nection between a sequence of psychological events and an envi-
ronment. Here we must assess the influence nature exerts on hu-
72 See my Ideas [SW z]; also my "Studies Toward the Foundation of the Human 
Sciences" in this volume and my Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW I. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
man beings and establish the effect the spiritual environing world 
has on them. 
Just as raw materials in industry are subjected to several kinds 
of processing, so the remnants of the past are made fully, histori-
cally understandable through various procedures. Criticism, inter-
pretation, and procedures to achieve a unified understanding of a 
historical process intermesh. But here too it is characteristic that a 
simple grounding of one operation on the others is not possible; 
criticism, interpretation, and the gathering of things in thought 
involve different tasks, but the solution of each of these tasks de-
mands the insights gained through the others. 
From this it follows that the justification of the historical nexus 
is always dependent on an interrelation of functions that cannot 
be completely explicated logically and cannot, therefore, be de-
fended against historical skepticism by undisputable demonstra-
tions. We have only to think of Niebuhr's great discoveries about 
older Roman history. His criticism is inseparable from his recon-
r62 
struction of the true course of events. He had to establish how the 
existing tradition of older Roman history had come about and 
what conclusions about its historical value could be drawn from 
its origin. At the same time he had to try to derive the basic out-
lines of the real, historical course of events from what could be 
argued from the facts. Undoubtedly this methodical procedure 
moves in a circle when measured by the rules of strict demonstra-
tion. And when Niebuhr, at the same time, argued analogically on 
the basis of similar developments, the knowledge of these related 
developments was subject to the same circle; and the analogical 
inference, which made use of this knowledge, produced no com-
pelling certainty. 
Even contemporary accounts must first be tested for the point of 
view of the reporter, his reliability, and his relationship to the 
event. And the further removed from the time of the events narra-
tions are, the less their credibility, unless the constituents of such a 
narrative can be checked by reference to older, contemporary re-
ports. The political history of the ancient world is reliable where 
witness accounts exist, and that of the modern one where the doc-
uments that shaped the course of a historical event are preserved. 
Therefore, reliable knowledge of political history only began with 
the methodical and critical collection of documents and free access 
to archives for historians. This knowledge can, as far as the facts 
are concerned, stand up to historical skepticism. On such secure 
184 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
foundations, a historically probable reconstruction, which only 
overexcited, unscientific minds would deny usefulness, can be gen-
erated by analyzing the sources of the accounts and examining the 
points of view of the reporters. Such reconstruction provides reli-
able knowledge of actions and events, if not of the motives of the 
actors, and any errors about specific facts to which we remain 
exposed do not cast doubt on the whole. 
Historiography, where it deals with mass-phenomena or, even 
more so, with artistic or scientific works that stand up to analysis, 
is much more favorably placed than when it tries to comprehend 
the course of political events. 
163 
STAGES OF HISTORICAL INTELLIGIBILITY 
The mastery of historical material takes place m vanous stages 
that gradually penetrate the depths of history. 
Manifold interests lead at first to the narration of what has hap-
pened. Above all, this satisfies a most primary curiosity about hu-
man affairs, particularly about those of one's native land. Na-
tional or civic pride asserts itself as well. This was the origin of 
narrative art, whose model for all ages is Herodotus/3 Then inter-
est in explanation moves into the foreground. The Athenian cul-
ture of the time of Thucydides first provided the right conditions 
for this. Deeds were perspicaciously traced back to their psycho-
logical motives; the course and outcome of the power struggles 
between states were explained in terms of their military and politi-
cal strengths; the effects of state constitutions were studied. And 
because a great political thinker such as Thucydides elucidates the 
past through the sober study of the productive systems in it, it 
turns out that history also illuminates the future. When an earlier 
productive sequence is recognized and proves to resemble the first 
stage of a process, the occurrence of a similar consequence can be 
anticipated on the basis of analogy. This inference on which Thu-
cydides based his belief that history had lessons for the future is, 
indeed, of decisive importance for political thought. As in the nat-
ural sciences, so also in history, a regularity within a productive 
system makes possible prediction and intervention based on knowl-
edge. Contemporaries of the Sophists had already studied consti-
tutions as political forces; then Polybius offers us historiography 
n Herodotus (c. 484-between 430 and 420 B.c.), Greek historian, who traveled 
most of the known world of his time; wrote a history of the Greco-Persian wars 
from soo to 479 B.C. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
in which the systematic human sciences are applied methodically 
to explain a productive system of history. This makes it possible 
to introduce enduring productive forces such as state constitu-
tions, military organizations, and fiscal systems into the explana-
tory procedure. Polybius's subject matter was the interaction of 
states that, from the beginning of the struggle between Rome and 
Carthage to the destruction of Carthage and Corinth, shaped the 
historical world of European civilization. Polybius undertook to 
derive specific political processes from the study of enduring forces 
in these states. At the same time, his point of view becomes that of 
universal history, because within himself he linked Greek theoreti-
cal culture, the study of the subtleties of politics and warfare in his 
r64 
native land, and a familiarity with Rome, which only intercourse 
with the leading statesmen of the new, universal state could pro-
vide. Manifold spiritual developments occurred in the time span 
from Polybius to Machiavelli and Guicciardini, above all the infi-
nite deepening of subjectivity and the simultaneous widening of 
the historical horizon. Nevertheless, the methods of the two great 
Italian historians remain strongly similar to those of Polybius. 
A new stage of historiography was not attained until the eigh-
teenth century. Two great principles were then introduced suc-
cessively; the concrete productive system lifted into prominence by 
the historian as his subject matter from the general stream of his-
tory was divided into the specific systems, such as the judicial, 
religious, and literary systems that are involved in the unity of an 
age. This presupposed that the historian looked beyond political 
history to cultural history, that the function of each cultural sphere 
had been recognized by the systematic human sciences, and that 
an understanding of the cooperation of such cultural systems had 
developed. This new historiography began in the age of Voltaire. 
Beginning with Winckelmann, Justus Moser/
4 and Herder, a sec-
ond principle was added- a principle of development. This as-
signs a new fundamental characteristic to a historical productive 
system, namely, that by its very nature, it undergoes, from within, 
a series of changes, each of which is only possible on the basis of 
the previous one. 
These are the various moments that, once grasped, have re-
mained alive in historiography. The joyful art of narration, pene-
trating explanation, the application of systematic knowledge, its 
74 Justus Mi:iser ( 1720-94), German historian, jurist, and publicist; author of 
Osnabriicker Geschichte, Patriotische Phantasien, and other works. 
186 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
analysis into specific productive systems, and the principle of de-
velopment represent moments that combine and re-enforce each 
other. 
ISOLATING A PRODUCTIVE SYSTEM FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE 
HISTORICAL SUBJECT MATTER 
The importance of analyzing a concrete productive nexus or sys-
tem and scientifically synthesizing the specific productive systems 
contained in it has become increasingly clear to us. 
The historian cannot follow the nexus of events in all directions 
from a given point to infinity. Instead, the historian's very task of 
grasping the unity of the particular subject matter that constitutes 
r65 
his theme provides a principle of selection. The treatment of a 
historical subject matter requires not only that it should be singled 
out from the overall concrete productive nexus or system but also 
that it contain a principle of selection. To study the fall of Rome, 
the liberation of the Netherlands or the French Revolution, we 
must select those events and contexts that contain the particular 
and general causes, the productive forces with all their transfor-
mations, that brought them about. The historian who works with 
productive systems must select and combine in such a way that 
those familiar with the details will miss nothing because each of 
them is represented by significant features of the gathered produc-
tive system. This involves not merely a descriptive art but is also a 
product of a definite way of seeing. When we examine these dis-
tinct, pervasive systems, we see once more how insight into them 
arises from the combination of an improved historical understand-
ing of sources and ever deeper comprehension of the systematic 
aspects of psychological life. If, then, we look more closely at the 
kind of productive system encountered in the greatest events of 
history, the rise of Christianity, the Reformation, the French Revo-
lution, the national wars of liberation, we can apprehend it as the 
formation of a total force, which, moving in a single direction, 
overthrows all resistance. We will always find two kinds of forces 
cooperating. Some are tensions that consist of the feeling of ur-
gent, unfulfilled needs, of longings of all kinds prompted by them, 
of an increase of frictions and struggles, and also of the conscious-
ness of an insufficiency in the forces that can defend the status 
quo. The other kind of forces arise from onward-pushing ener-
gies- positive willing, capabilities, and beliefs. They rely on the 
vigorous instincts of the many but are illuminated and heightened 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
by the lived experiences of important characters. And as these pos-
itive tendencies grow from the past and direct themselves toward 
the future, they are creative. They incorporate ideals, their form 
is an enthusiasm that has a special way of communicating and 
spreading itself. 
From this we deduce the general principle that in the productive 
nexus of the great world events, the relationships of pressure, ten-
sion, the feeling of the insufficiency of the existing state of af-
r66 
fairs- that is, feelings of aversion with a negative prognosis-
form the background for action sustained by feelings of positive 
value toward goals to strive for and purposes to be set. Great 
changes in the world originate from the cooperation of these two 
[kinds of force]. The real agency in productive systems comes 
from psychic states that find their formulation in terms of value, 
good, and purpose; among these states not only cultural aspira-
tions but also the will to power, even the inclination to subjugate 
others, must be considered as productive forces. 
ANALYSIS OF THE DISTINCT PRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS IN HISTORY 
r. Cultural Systems 
We saw that to define the object of a historical work already 
demands a selection of events and systems. History involves an 
ordering system that allows its concrete nexus to exhibit particular 
isolable domains in which distinct functions are fulfilled. As a con-
sequence, activities of specific individuals directed at a common 
function form a uniform and homogeneous productive system. 
This relationship has already been discussed by me/5 and it pro-
vides the basis for the concept-formation by which systems of a 
general character can be recognized in the science of history. The 
analysis and isolation by means of which such productive systems 
are selected define the critical operation that needs to be investi-
gated in a logical articulation of the human sciences. There is an 
obvious affinity between this analysis and that by which the struc-
tural nexus of the psychic life-unit is found. 
The most simple and homogeneous productive systems that ful-
fill a cultural function involve education, economic life, the law, 
political activity, religion, sociability, art, philosophy, and science. 
I will explicate the characteristics of such a productive system. 
7
' See my Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW r, 93ff. 
I 88 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
Each such system fulfills one function. Thus the judicial system 
actualizes the enforceable conditions for the perfection of life-rela-
tionships. Poetry's essence is to express the content of lived experi-
ence and to present the objectifications of life in such a way that 
some occurrence chosen by the poet effectively displays its mean-
I67 
ing for life as a whole. Individuals are connected with each other 
in the functioning of a productive system. Particular processes in 
individuals are oriented to the function of the productive system 
and belong to it. These processes are parts of a system that fulfills 
the function. 
When we consider the judicial rules of the code of law, the trial 
in which parties negotiate about an inheritance in a court of law 
on the basis of these rules, and finally, the decision of the court 
and its execution, then we can also see a long series of particular 
psychic processes involved here. These can be distributed among 
many persons, and they intermesh in manifold ways in order 
to finally solve a legal problem in relation to a specific life-
relationship. 
The fulfillment of the poetic function is much more tied to a 
coherent process in the poet's psyche, but no poet is the exclusive 
creator of his works. He takes an event from a legend, and the 
epic form that he uses to raise it to the level of poetry preexists 
him. He studies the efficacy of specific scenes in predecessors, he 
uses meter, he receives his conception of the meaning of life from a 
national consciousness or from prominent individuals, and he 
needs ret:eptive listeners who are capable of enjoyment and who 
will assimilate the impression of his verses and thus realize his 
dream of having an effect. Thus the contribution of law, poetry, or 
any other purposive system of culture is realized in a productive 
system that consists of determinate processes in specific individ-
uals linked by some function. 
The productive nexus of a cultural system manifests a second 
characteristic. Besides his function in the legal system, a judge also 
takes part in various other productive systems. He works for the 
interests of his family, he performs an economic role, he serves his 
political functions, he may even write verses. Thus the fullness of 
individuals is not captured by any productive system. Rather, amidst 
the various kinds of productive relations, only those processes or 
operations are called upon that are needed by a specific system. 
An individual is interwoven into various productive systems. 
The productive nexus of such a cultural system operates by 
means of a differentiated placement of its members. The steady 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
support for each is supplied by persons who have made the opera-
tions serving the system's function the main business of their lives, 
either from inclination or because it is connected with their profes-
sion. Among them appear persons who embody, as it were, the 
intended contribution of the system. A combination of talent and 
r68 
calling makes them into representatives of this cultural system. In 
the final analysis, the real carriers of creativity in such a domain 
are productive types: founders of religions, discoverers of a new 
philosophical world-view, scientific inventors. 
Several things are integrated in such a productive system: accu-
mulated tensions in a broad sphere press toward a resolution in 
which needs are satisfied, productive energy finds the way in which 
satisfaction can be achieved or produces a creative idea that leads 
society further, others join in to continue the work, and finally, 
there are the many recipients. 
We pursue our analysis further. Each cultural system that fulfills 
such a function embodies a common value for all those who are 
directed at this function. What individuals need and yet can never 
realize is imparted to them in the contribution of the whole- a 
commonly created comprehensive value in which they can partici-
pate. The individual needs the security of his life, of his property, 
of his family connections, but only the independent power of the 
community satisfies his need by preserving the enforceable rules of 
social life that make possible the protection of these goods. In 
primitive stages, the individual suffers from the pressure of uncon-
trollable forces around him. These forces lie beyond the narrow 
sphere of action of his tribe or people. The reduction of this pres-
sure first allows for the creation of trust through a communal 
spirit. In each such cultural system there arises, from the nature of 
the function served by its productive nexus, an order of values. 
This order is created in common work aimed at this function. Ob-
jectifications of life arise as the consolidation of this work, e.g., 
organizations that serve the fulfillment of the functions of cultural 
systems: codes of law, philosophical works, literary creations. The 
good that is to be realized by the function becomes public, and it 
can be continually perfected. 
The parts of such a productive system receive their significance 
from their relationship to the whole as the carrier of values and 
purposes. First, the parts of a life-course possess a meaning ac-
cording to their relationship to life, its values and purposes, and 
the space that something assumes within it. Historical events 
become meaningful when they are parts of a productive system, 
190 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
when they cooperate with other parts in actualizing the values and 
purposes of the whole. 
r69 
Whereas we stand helpless vis-a-vis the overall nexus of histori-
cal events and can observe in it neither a structure nor regularities 
nor a development, every productive system that actualizes a func-
tion of culture displays its own structure. When we grasp philoso-
phy as such a productive system, then it first presents itself as a 
manifold of functions: raising world-views to universal validity, 
reflecting on knowledge, relating our purposive activity and prac-
tical knowledge to the system of conceptual cognition, gathering 
and grounding the spirit of criticism that pervades the whole cul-
ture. Historical inquiry demonstrates, however, that these are all 
functions that arise under historical conditions but are ultimately 
grounded in a coherent function of philosophy. This is universal 
reflection, which constantly advances to the highest generaliza-
tions and ultimate groundings. Accordingly, the structure of phi-
losophy lies in the relationship of this basic feature to its specific 
functions in accordance with temporal conditions. Everywhere 
metaphysics develops against the backdrop of life, life-experience, 
and world-views. Because the striving for stability that always 
struggles with the contingency of our existence finds no lasting 
satisfaction in the religious and poetic forms of world-view, the 
attempt is made to raise a world-view to universally valid knowl-
edge. Furthermore, we can find an articulation of specific forms in 
the productive nexus of a cultural system. 
Each cultural system manifests development on the basis of its 
function, its structure, and its uniformities. Whereas no law of 
development is to be found in the concrete course of events, its 
analysis into specific homogeneous productive systems opens 
up the prospect of sequences of states that are determined from 
within and presuppose each other. It is as if one stratum always 
leads to a higher one that adds increased differentiation and com-
prehension. 
2. External Organizations, the Political Whole, 
and Politically Organized Nations 
a 
On the basis of the natural articulation of the human race and 
historical processes, we see the emergence of the nation-states of 
the cultural world, each of which unites within itself the produc-
r7o 
tive spheres of cultural systems. Here the nations that are orga-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
nized as states stand out, and our analysis will limit itself to this 
typical form of current political organization. 
Each of these states is an organization that is composed of var-
ious communities. The capacity to hold together these commu-
nities gathered within it ultimately constitutes the sovereign power 
of the state over which there exists no higher authority. And who 
could deny the fact that the sense of history that is grounded in 
life manifests itself just as much in the will to power of these states 
and their need to rule both inwardly and outwardly as in the cul-
tural systems? Despite all the brutal, fearsome, and destructive as-
pects inherent in the will to power, despite all the pressures and 
constraints involved in the relationship of dominance and obe-
dience, are they not linked to the consciousness of community, of 
solidarity, of joyful participation in the power of a political whole, 
lived experiences that belong among the highest human values? 
The complaint about the brutality of state power is odd, because 
as Kant saw already, the most difficult task of the human race 
consists in taming the willfulness of individuals and their efforts to 
expand their spheres of power and enjoyment. This taming must 
come from a collective will and from the coercion exerted by it. 
For such collective wills, [external] conflicts can only be decided 
by war, and internally, they resort to coercion as the final au-
thority. On the basis of this will for power inherent in political or-
ganizations, the conditions arise that first make possible cultural 
systems. A complex structure then comes about in which power 
relations and interrelated, purposive systems form a higher unity. 
First the reciprocal influences of cultural systems produce a com-
mon perspective. I will try to explicate this commonality by going 
back to the earliest German society still accessible to us as de-
scribed by Caesar and Tacitus. Here economic life, state, and law 
are just as closely linked with language, myth, religiosity, and po-
etry as in every subsequent period. Reciprocal influences among 
the properties of the particular domains of life pervade the whole 
[society] at any given time. Thus in the age of Tacitus, heroic po-
etry emerged from the warrior spirit of the Germans. Arminius 
was already extolled in songs, and this poetry in turn re-enforced 
the warrior spirit. This martial ethos also led to inhuman behavior 
in the religious sphere, such as the sacrificing of prisoners and the 
hanging of their corpses at holy sites. All this served to give the 
r7r 
god of warfare a prominence that in turn intensified the warrior 
mentality. An accord among the various domains of life resulted 
that was so strong that we could extrapolate from the state of one 
192 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
to the others. But this reciprocal influence does not fully explain 
the commonalities that connect the various achievements of a na-
tion with each other. The fact that there exists an extraordinary 
agreement and harmony among the economy, the warfare, the 
constitution, law, language, myth, religiosity, and poetry of this 
time also does not spring from any single fundamental function, 
such as the economic life or warfare, that conditions all the others. 
It can also not simply be derived as the product of the reciprocal 
influence among these various domains as they coexisted at the 
time. Speaking very generally: No matter which effects were pro-
duced by the force and properties of certain functions, the kinship 
displayed by the various life-domains within a nation stems from a 
common depth to which no description can do justice. For us, it is 
there only in the manifestations of life that arise from this depth 
and bring it to expression. For a nation at a given time, it is the 
individual that imparts to every life-manifestation in a certain cul-
tural domain the specificity of its essence. When individuals are 
linked in a functional system, their activities are not exclusively 
determined by the latter. Rather, since the whole person is reflected 
in his every deed, he can impart some of his peculiarities to the 
system in which he participates. And because the organization of 
the state includes within it various communities ranging down to 
the family, the great sphere of national life similarly encompasses 
smaller systems and communities that possess their own impetus. 
All these productive systems intersect in specific individuals. More-
over, the state assimilates the activity of cultural systems. Prussia 
in the age of Frederick is the type for this kind of maximization of 
the intensity and scope of political efficacy. Besides the indepen-
dent productive forces that continue to operate in cultural sys-
tems, they display a dynamism deriving from the state as a whole. 
The processes belonging to such a state everywhere combine au-
tonomy and constraint. 
b 
Each particular sphere in this great, productive system of the na-
tion-state has its inherent impetus and is aimed at fulfilling its own 
function. Its productive force encompasses both the tension and 
the positive energy of setting goals. All productive systems agree in 
this, but each nevertheless has its own structure that is dependent 
on the function that it fulfills. The structure of a cultural system is 
one in which a well-delineated, functional coherence is realized so 
that the latter can regulate the activities of the individual spheres. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
193 
Because such a cultural system embodies values, goals, rules, and 
purposes whose development is determined by the inner nature of 
its function, it differs from the productive system of a political 
organization. The latter does not manifest a developmental law 
inherent in its function, for it is the very nature of an organization, 
as such, that its goals change. It is like a machine that can be used 
to fulfill various tasks- quite heterogeneous problems can be solved 
concurrently, and very different kinds of values can be realized. 
From such an analysis of the historical world into particular 
productive systems, we draw a conclusion that will guide us in our 
further attempts to solve the problem of the historical world. Ef-
forts to define the meaning and sense of the historical world are 
often, as in the case of Hegel and Comte, based on establishing a 
common direction in the movement of universal history. It in-
volves an operation that surveys the cooperation of many move-
ments in an indeterminate intuition. In fact, our conclusion was 
that the movement of history proceeds through particular produc-
tive systems. Furthermore, we saw that the mode of inquiry di-
rected at a goal of history is thoroughly one-sided. The evident 
sense of history must first be sought in what is ever present and 
recurring in its structural relations, in its productive systems. The 
formation of values and purposes in these structures and systems 
manifests inner relations that proceed from the structure of indi-
vidual life to an ultimate encompassing unity. This is the sense 
always and everywhere possessed by history- it is based on the 
structure of individual existence and discloses itself in the struc-
ture of the composite, productive systems involved in the objec-
tification of life. This regularity also determines previous develop-
ment, and the future is subject to it as well. The analysis of the 
173 
formation of the world of human spirit will have as its prime task 
to demonstrate these regularities in the structure of the historical 
world. 
Herewith we can also dispose of the view that sees the task of 
history in the progression from relative values, obligations, norms, 
and goals to those that are unconditional. This would move us 
from the domain of experiential science to that of speculation. To 
be sure, history knows of the ways in which unconditionality is 
posited as a value, norm, or good. Such positings appear through-
out history- sometimes as given in the will of God, sometimes as 
given in a rational concept of perfection, then again in a teleologi-
cal world-nexus, or in a universally valid norm of action that is 
transcendentally grounded. But historical experience notes only 
194 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
the processes of these positings that are so important for uncondi-
tionality. By itself, it knows nothing about this universal validity. 
When historical experience traces the course of the formation of 
such unconditional values, goods, or norms, it notices, about some 
of them, how life has produced them and that the unconditional 
positing itself only becomes possible by restricting the temporal 
horizon. From there it views the totality of life in the fullness of its 
historical manifestations and notices the unabated strife among 
these unconditional positings. The question whether subsumption 
under such unconditionality, which is indeed a historical factum, 
needs to be derived from a universal, temporally unrestricted hu-
man condition in a logically compelling manner, or whether it is to 
be regarded as a mere product of history, leads into ultimate pro-
fundities of transcendental philosophy that transcend the experi-
ential sphere of history and from which even philosophy cannot 
snatch any sure answer. Even if this question were to be decided 
along the first alternative, this could not aid historians in what 
they select and in how they understand and discover connected-
ness if the content of this unconditional could not be determined. 
The incursion of speculation into the domain of historical experi-
ence can hardly count on success. The historian cannot forgo the 
attempt to understand history from itself on the basis of analyzing 
the various productive systems. 
c 
Thus a nation organized as a state can be grasped as an individu-
ally determined structural unity of productive systems. The com-
mon character of nations organized as states is grounded in regu-
174 
larities about the mode of operation of productive systems and 
about their relations between each other; and because these pro-
ductive systems create values and purposes, we must also consider 
regularities about the relation of productive systems to the pro-
duction of values, to the setting of purposes, and to the meaning 
context of a political organization. Each of these productive sys-
tems is centered in itself in a specific way, and the inner rule of its 
development is derived from this. On the basis of such regularities 
governing all nations organized as states, there arise the individual 
configurations of productive systems as they interact in history 
and struggle for their life and legitimacy. 
In each nation organized as a state, analysis distinguishes var-
ious moments. In the present context we are not concerned with 
the genetic history of nations. First, the individuals who belong to 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
195 
this nation, and who interact with each other, exhibit common-
alities in their character and in the objectifications of their life. 
They are conscious of these commonalities and of a solidarity 
based on them, and therefore a tendency to develop this solidarity 
is at work in them. These commonalities can be observed in single 
individuals, but they also permeate and color all associations 
within the nation. Second, analysis shows a link between the par-
ticular productive systems in each nation. The external and inter-
nal power of the state makes the nation an independently working 
unit within which social groups are layered on top of each other. 
Each of these associations is a relatively independent productive 
system. Third, when the cultural systems that exceed the scope of 
a particular nation come into contact with the other productive 
systems in that nation, they become modified by the common-
alities shared by its people as a whole. And the power of its effect 
is intensified by associations that develop for the sake of a deter-
minate function. In this way the composite structure of the nation 
organized as a state comes about. This structure allows for a new 
focal point for the whole nation, in which a value is experienced 
for all and through which individual action can have a common 
goal. The unity of this goal is objectified in literature, ethics, the 
legal order, and in the organs of the common will. This unity also 
expresses itself in the course of national development. 
The various movements of a whole organized as a state and the 
ways in which they serve to define its national life at a given time 
can be elucidated in terms of a few main points. To do so I again 
return to the Germans in the age of Tacitus, when close links be-
tween war and the use of land, between hunting and farming, 
175 
were still fundamental to Germanic life. When the spread of Ger-
manic tribes was stemmed, the natural tendency toward settlement 
accelerated and Germany became an agricultural country. This re-
lationship to the land and soil through hunting, cattle breeding, 
and farming produced a proximity to the earth and to what grows 
and lives there in the Germans of that time. Such closeness is the 
first decisive moment for the spiritual life of Germans in this ep-
och. Equally clear is the influence of the other already mentioned 
social factor of the time: the influence of the military ethos of the 
Germanic tribes on the political life, the social institutions, and the 
spiritual culture of the age. The goals of war permeated all parts 
of life. They asserted themselves in the relationship of the family 
to the military order, in organized bodies of a hundred men. They 
influenced the position of chieftains and princes. The military 
196 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
ethos also produced the system of devoted followers that was so 
important for military and political development. The prince is 
surrounded by an entourage of free people as the military mem-
bers of his household. Only war could support such an entourage, 
which was bound to the prince by the strongest loyalty: a relation-
ship that manifests itself in its peculiarly Germanic beauty in he-
roic and national epic poems. War produced the military kingdom 
of a Marbod.
76 
To these factors we must add the individuality of national spirit, 
whose commonalities display themselves in the results of the pro-
ductive systems. The military ethos that the Germanic tribes of 
this time have in common with early stages of other peoples nev-
ertheless shows a special intensity and distinctiveness. The life-
value of the individual person is shifted to his martial qualities. 
According to Tacitus, it is as if the best of them only lived fully in 
war; the care of house, hearth, and fields was left to the women 
and those unfit for war. A peculiar trait leads these Germanic peo-
ple to act from the wholeness of their being and to risk themselves 
fully and completely. Their action is not determined and delimited 
by a rational consideration of purpose; something irrational, a sur-
plus of energy that exceeds a purpose, is to be found in their 
deeds. With inexhaustible, untamable passion they stake their 
whole person and freedom on a game of dice. They enjoy the dan-
ger of battle, and after the combat is over, they fall into a state of 
indolent repose. Their myths, their heroic legends, are filled with 
the naive, unconscious characteristic of placing the highest value 
and enjoyment of existence not in the serene world-view of the 
176 
Greeks, not in the intellectually delimited consideration of purpose 
of the Romans, but in the raw exertion of power without any 
limit, and in the stresses and exaltations of the self as it expands. 
This characteristic, which finds its highest expression in the joy of 
battle, influenced the entire development of our political institu-
tions and of our spiritual life. 
One of the final moments involved in a specific national whole 
that determines its development concerns the way isolated, smaller 
associations are integrated into the political sphere and how this 
integration comes about through the relationships of domination 
and obedience, as well as of community, that are combined in the 
sovereign will of a state. Thus in Germany we see the following 
7
" Marbod founded a short-lived military kingdom in Bohemia. He died in 
A.D. 63. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
197 
sequence: a national kingdom that comprises small communities 
that are still not fully differentiated in structure; then with increas-
ing division of labor, an articulation of the professions, separation 
of estates and classes in a loosely linked national whole; then the 
development of autocracy involving an intensive and expansive 
state activity in territorial states, which gradually erodes the above 
articulation based on professions and estates into the relation 
between the rights of individuals and the autocratic striving for 
power; and finally, the advance of these states toward a constant 
expansion of the rights of individuals and of peoples in a represen-
tational system and toward democratic institutions, but at the 
same time a subordination of local sovereignty to a national em-
pire. If we look at this overall development, we see that it is sub-
ject to a twofold influence. On the one hand, it is dependent on 
shifting power relationships among states; on the other hand, it is 
dependent on the internal factors in the development of single 
states that we have surveyed. 
Thus it is possible to analyze the constituents of the productive 
system conditioning both the individual moments in the develop-
ment of a nation and its overall development. The regularities per-
taining to the structure of the political whole determine its overall 
states and the changes therein. It is as if layers of the life-patterns 
of this whole were sedimented on each other, so that each presup-
poses some prior level, as we have seen for the changes in the 
political organization. Each of these levels exhibits its own order 
in which productive systems, beginning with individuals, produce 
values, realize purposes, gather goods, and develop rules of action. 
Because the carriers and goals of these functions differ, there arises 
rn 
the problem of how all these functions manifest an inner link from 
which they derive their meaning. From here, the analysis of the 
logical nexus of the human sciences leads to a new task for whose 
solution we must appeal to the connection of the proper methods 
in the formation of the human sciences. 
3. Ages and Epochs 
We have already seen that within a specific time period, individ-
ual productive systems can be analytically differentiated, that the 
developmental moments encompassed by them can be exhibited, 
that the relations among these specific systems can be linked into a 
structural whole, and that commonalities among the parts of a 
political whole can be determined. But we can also understand the 
other side of the historical world, the line of its temporal course 
198 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
and the changes in it, by going back to productive systems as con-
tinuous wholes that ate nevertheless separable into temporal 
phases. What primarily characterizes generations, ages, and ep-
ochs77 is that they are general, dominant, and permeating tenden-
cies. They involve the concentration of the whole culture of such a 
temporal span within itself, so that the values, purposes, and life-
rules of the time can provide the norm for judging, evaluating, and 
assessing the persons and the tendencies or directions that give a 
specific time its character. An individual, a tendency, and a com-
munity derive their meaning within this whole through their inner 
relation to the spirit of the age. And since all individuals fit within 
some such time span, it follows that their meaning for history lies 
in this reference to their time. Those persons who advance force-
fully in their time span are the leaders of their time, its represen-
tatives. 
In this sense one can speak of the spirit of a time, whether of the 
Middle Ages or of the Enlightenment. This entails that each such 
epoch finds a delimitation in a life-horizon. I understand by this a 
178 
mode of delimitation through which the people of a time orient 
their life by their thinking, feeling, and willing. Such a horizon 
places life, life-concerns, life-experience, and thought-formation in 
a certain proportion that restricts and binds the sphere within 
which individuals can modify their cognitive, evaluative, and voli-
tional outlooks. Shades of the inevitable are cast over the single 
individual. 
Besides the general, dominant, and permeating tendency that 
gives a time its character, there exist other tendencies that oppose 
it. They strive to conserve the old, they observe the unfortunate 
consequences of the one-sidedness of the spirit of the time and 
turn against it. However, when something creative and new emerges 
that stems from another life-feeling, then amidst this very time 
span a movement begins that is destined to launch a new age. 
Before this happens, every mode of opposition to the age is nev-
ertheless dependent on it; everything in an epoch that resists it 
77 I first proposed and used the historical concept of generations in my 1865 
essay about Navalis (now in Das Erlebnis und die Dichtung). I employed it more 
extensively in the first volume of Das Leben Sch/eiermachers and then in the essay 
"Concerning the Study of the History of the Sciences of Man, Society and State" 
(1875) GS V, 31-73 [see SW 2], where the historical concept of generation was 
developed with other related concepts. A more adequate definition of the concepts 
"historical continuity," "generation," "age," "epoch" is possible only in an ac-
count of the formation of the human sciences. (D) 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
1 99 
nevertheless has the structure of that time. The creative moment is 
the one that first institutes a new proportion of life, life-concerns, 
life-experience, and thought-formation. 
The meaning-relations existing between historical forces in a 
time span are grounded in those relations of commonalities and 
productive systems that can be designated as tendencies, currents, 
and movements. Only on their basis is it possible to deal with the 
more difficult problem of analytically determining the structural 
nexus of an age or a period. 
Let me illustrate this problem by considering this inner nexus 
for the German Enlightenment, for the task is easier if we begin 
the analysis of an age by focusing on a single nation. 
Science had constituted itself in the seventeenth century. The 
discovery of an order of nature in accordance with laws and the 
application of causal relations to gain control of nature produced 
a confidence in the regular progress of conceptual cognition. The 
culturally developed nations cooperated in this cognitive project, 
and this led to the idea of a humanity united in progress. The ideal 
of reason governing society was formed and provided our highest 
powers a kind of fulfillment. These powers were united by a com-
mon goal; they worked according to the same method; they ex-
pected the further development of a collective social order from 
the advance of knowledge. The old edifice to whose formation 
a dominant church, feudal relationships, unbridled despotism, 
princely fancies, and priestly deceit had jointly contributed and 
179 
that was constantly changing through time and in need of ever 
new work was now supposed to be transformed and given a pur-
posive, bright, and symmetrical structure. This is the inner unity 
that linked the spiritual life of individuals, science, religion, philos-
ophy, and art in the European system of the Enlightenment into a 
whole. 
This unity was achieved in different ways in specific countries. It 
was fashioned in an especially fortunate and stable way in Ger-
many. Its higher spiritual life carne to be marked by a general 
direction. Going back in time one sees in Germany, even as far 
back as Freidank,n a tendency to consciously order life by means 
of stable rules. To designate these rules as moral would be too 
one-sided and would define their scope too narrowly. The serious-
ness of the Northern peoples is here combined with a meditative 
n Freidank was the presumed name of a thirteenth-century author of a didactic 
poem on moral and religious questions. 
200 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
need for reflection, which arises from a turn to the inwardness of 
life that is undoubtedly connected with their political conditions. 
Just as in the German empire, which had become inflexible, legal 
clauses, privileges, and agreements limited the free movement of 
life, so the feeling of constraint had become stronger in individuals 
than the feeling of freely choosing one's own goals. The enjoyment 
of life was always accompanied by a sense of impropriety. Strong 
types snatched at enjoyment, but their conscience always dis-
played some scruples. Thus there is a basic trait in eighteenth-
century German philosophy that unites Leibniz, Thomasius, Wolff, 
Lessing, Frederick the Great, Kant, and innumerable lesser figures. 
This is their tendency to stress obligation and duty- something 
fostered by the development of Lutheranism and its morality ever 
since Melanchthon. A sense of obligation was also encouraged by 
the articulation of society through the concepts of vocation and 
appointed office, which Luther had carried over into the modern 
age. And because the tendency toward the independence of the 
person was intensified in the Enlightenment, it became a duty to 
perfect oneself. Reason contains a natural law of spirit that ex-
pects the individual to realize perfection in himself and in others. 
This demand is a duty that is not imposed by God but can be 
established on the basis of the law of our own nature and rational 
grounds. Only subsequently may the rule of reason be referred to 
the ground of things. This is the theory of Wolff that goes back to 
Pufendorf, Leibniz, and Thomasius and forward to Kant. It per-
meates the entire literature of the German Enlightenment. This 
theory contains the unifying link that binds Germans of the En-
I8o 
lightenment with those of the seventeenth century and produces a 
uniform overall spirit in this epoch. This imponderable spirit per-
meating the nation is everywhere modified, but always the same. It 
is a determination of the value of life that underlies the living 
nexus of the German Enlightenment. The new schema of the prog-
ress of the soul toward a highest value is grounded in the rational 
character of humanity. The individual person realizes his purpose 
when he attains maturity on the basis of reason and establishes the 
rule of reason over his passions. This sovereignty of reason ex-
presses itself as perfection. Since reason is universally valid and 
common to all, and the perfection of the whole by reason stands 
higher than the perfection of a single part- in the sense that the 
perfection of all individuals possesses a higher value than that of a 
single person- the highest obligation is the one relating the indi-
vidual to the well-being of the whole. The result is a further deter-
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
201 
ruination of this principle as the perfection of all individuals to be 
achieved through the progress of the whole. This Enlightenment 
principle is not just a product of pure thought, and its dominance 
was not based on it. Rather, this principle is an abstract expression 
of all the values of life experienced by the people of the Enlighten-
ment. Thus perfection, strangely enough, becomes an explicit duty 
for these thinkers, especially Wolff, and the striving for perfection 
a law that binds individuals. For Wolff and his followers, the deity 
becomes the object of duties that have their core in a striving for 
perfection. The life-experience that forms the basis of this idea can 
best be studied in Leibniz. It is based on the lived experience of the 
happiness found in development. It is in the making of progress 
itself that this great thinker, and then Lessing, located the highest 
human happiness, which can never be equaled by the content of 
any moment. And the fact that progress does not refer to this or 
that particular purpose but to the development of individual per-
sons so as to encompass and connect everything in them, is first 
expressed by Leibniz on the basis of his lived experience. This 
experience was prepared for in every way, because individuals 
were repeatedly thrown back on themselves and to common cul-
tural tasks because of the unfortunate state of our national life. 
Once articulated by Leibniz, this view spread its influence every-
where. These concepts of value stemming from life itself and ap-
preciated by Leibniz then determined the task he set for his philos-
ophy, which is to derive the meaning of life and the sense of the 
world from a complex of individual, existential values. 
In the age of Enlightenment, there is thus a uniform continuum 
r8r 
proceeding from the form of life to life-experience, from the rele-
vant lived experiences to their re-presentation in concepts of value, 
precepts of duty, determination of ends, consciousness of the 
meaning of life, and of the sense of the world. Amidst a growing 
awareness of the age about itself, these re-presentations attain an 
absolute character through the use of abstract formulas and ratio-
nal demonstration. Unconditional values, obligations, duties, and 
goods are asserted, whereas the historian recognizes their emer-
gence from life itself. 
Just as we see amidst individual reflection about life in Germany 
the rudiments of its rational formation, so at the same time we see 
the emergence of an analogous tendency in the life of the state 
on the basis of the peculiar conditions of the political productive 
system. 
With the rise of modern Europe, the activity of the state has 
202 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
become increasingly influential in the various cultural domains. 
The organizational center of all power relations now lies in the 
civil service, the military, and in financial institutions. The activity 
of the state is becoming a driving force in cultural change. We see 
this in the struggle among the great states for power and expan-
sion and in their inherent need to combine parts of land accumu-
lated through the contingencies of war and inheritance into a 
uniform whole. The unity of the new states is concentrated in 
monarchs, their bureaucracies, and their armies, but it becomes 
necessary for modern states to arrive at a more stable articulation 
of their organs and a more intense utilization of its forces. This is 
only possible through a more rational management of its opera-
tions. Political progress does not come naturally; it is made. Every 
activity of the whole is driven by rational goals. This whole incor-
porates ever more cultural tasks: the educational system, the sci-
ences, and even ecclesiastical life where it is attainable. A head of 
state embodies not only the unity but also the cultural direction of 
the entire state. The free, irrational forces involved in interper-
sonal loyalty are replaced by calculable and predictable forces. 
Thus the relation of forces that constitutes the unity of the age of 
Enlightenment fulfills itself in the life of the state. That which the 
state needs, namely, the rational ordering of life and the rational 
employment of nature, is accommodated by the scientific move-
ment grounded in the seventeenth century. The sciences in turn 
find in the state the organ whereby all branches of life from eco-
nomic activity to the rules of good taste in the arts can be ratio-
r82 
nally regulated. 
No country was as well prepared for such inner accommodation 
characteristic of the essence of Enlightenment as Germany. Its 
smaller states were dependent on cultural development, and Prus-
sia was additionally concerned to engage intellectual and cultural 
forms in the service of its striving for power. Nowhere was the 
interchange between religious and scientific forces as well devel-
oped as here. We see lines of influence proceeding from the life of 
Protestant communities to the school system and the universities, 
which in turn generated advances in the religious thinking of the 
clergy and in the legal ideas of lawyers, and from there, back to 
the people. 
Thus productive forces of quite heterogeneous origin, produc-
tive systems engaged in very different stages of their development, 
cooperate in the German Enlightenment. At the same time that the 
intellectual unity of the Enlightenment realizes itself in science, in 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
203 
philosophical reflection as well as in social life, its efficacy mani-
fests itself in all the particular domains of spiritual life. An inter-
esting example of this for the development of the German legal 
system can be found in the emergence of the most perfect legisla-
tion of the time, namely, Prussian Common Law. 79 In Halle, an 
independent branch of natural law and a system of jurisprudence 
based on it were formed from the spirit of the Prussian state. 
Through their writings, Thomasius, Wolff, Bohmer, and many 
lesser lights disseminated the legal perspective of this school every-
where. This perspective was used to educate the bureaucracy, 
which was then able to complete the long-stagnant work of legis-
lation in Prussia through the unity and national character of its 
intellectual orientation. This conception of natural law governed 
both the king, who ordered its institution, and the ministers and 
advisers who executed it. The same close interrelation existed in 
the religious movement of the Enlightenment. It also manifested 
the peculiar duality of the German Enlightenment, being at once 
polemical and constructive. Church history, natural law, and eccle-
siastical law cooperated in German Protestantism to develop a 
view of primitive Christianity, which then became the force driv-
ing Bohmer, Semler, Lessing, and Pfaff80 to produce a new ideal of 
religiosity and ecclesiastical order. Here too there was a circulation 
of ideas generated by the dissatisfaction with existing conditions 
and the positive power of new universal ideas. These ideas pro-
ceeded from schools and universities not dependent on the power 
of clerical orthodoxy but allied with the general scientific ethos, 
and had the effect of cultivating individual clergymen who embod-
r83 
ied an enlightened Christianity at one with the spirit of the age in 
their locality, whether it be in the city or in the countryside. Never 
had Christian religiosity advanced the highest moral-religious 
ideas and the theistic impulses of Christianity as straightforwardly 
and consistently as in the age of the German Enlightenment. New 
religious values of the greatest import were cultivated in the eccle-
siastical and religious life of that time. The German literature of 
the age was also influenced by this Enlightenment revolution in 
values and ends. The autocratic enlightened state influenced the 
nature of poetic creativity. Proceeding from France, a new prose 
style was formed in Germany through the efforts of cultured soci-
79 PreufSisches Allgemeines Landrecht: the 1794 codification of the then existing 
common law in Prussia. 
'"Johann Friedrich Pfaff (ry6s-r825), German mathematician. 
204 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
ety. Literary genres were prescribed rules, and these rules disci-
plined the great form of imaginative art from Shakespeare and 
Cervantes into the strict form of logically articulated poetic works. 
The ideal of the latter form of literature is that of the human being 
governed by the idea of perfection and enlightenment. Its world-
view involves the belief in the teleological order of the world from 
nature upwards. The direct expression of this ideal and of this 
world-view is the didactic poem: it is also allied to the idyll and 
elegy. The tragic character of life is not understood: comedy, 
drama, and especially the novel become the highest expression of 
the age and receive a corresponding structure; a realism guided by 
optimistic ideas permeates all poetic works. 
The general way in which the dominant direction of the Ger-
man Enlightenment is expressed in the most diverse areas of life 
does not, however, determine everyone that belongs to this age, 
and even where it exerts an influence, there are often other forces 
at work as well. Opposed tendencies from the previous age assert 
themselves. Those forces that ally themselves with these older ten-
dencies and ideas, but attempt to give them a new form, become 
especially powerful. 
This is how Pietism emerged in the sphere of religion. It was the 
strongest among the forces in which the old assumed new forms. 
Pietism is akin to the Enlightenment in its increasing indifference 
toward external ecclesiastical forms, in its demand for tolerance, 
but especially because it moves beyond tradition and authority, as 
undermined by critique, in order to seek a simple, clear justifica-
tion for faith. This justification lies in one's own relation to God 
and the religious experience rooted in that relation. Only those 
who have been converted can understand the Bible: the_ word of 
r84 
God found there is revealed to them; they are capable of making 
discoveries, as it were, in the domain of Christianity. The tolerance 
of Pietism consists in recognizing every mode of Christian faith 
based on conversion. Pietists must supplement their own religious 
experience with the conversion narratives of others. Thus we see 
how Pietism belongs to the great movement of individualism, be-
cause it goes beyond Lutheranism by excluding the church from 
the inner life of the person. At the same time, however, it stands 
opposed to the Enlightenment by agreeing with Luther's confi-
dence in the religious experience stemming from contact with 
God. Pietism also stands in a close relation to the consummate 
sacred music of Johann Sebastian Bach. Although Bach was not a 
Pietist, the Christian hymns that accompany his portrayal of the 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
205 
life of Jesus manifest an affinity with the subjective, religious inner 
life that came to the fore with the Pietistic movement. 
A similar tendency to cling to the old asserted itself against the 
political movement toward enlightened autocracy. It was directed 
at the preservation of the empire, the privileges of rank within the 
particular states, and the continuation of old rights. But even this 
[conservative] tendency derives its higher consciousness and its 
grounding from the study of the literature of Enlightenment politi-
cal science. The proposals of a Schlosser and Moser attempt to 
accommodate the new needs and spirit of the Enlightenment. Thus 
the political ideas of the Enlightenment surround Moser even as 
the already existing conditions nurture his understanding of them 
and his practical tendencies. 
The various trends that feed the tensions and volatility of an 
epoch such as the German Enlightenment can only be recognized 
as interdependent when one discovers those moments within its 
basic course that make possible a shift toward the future. The very 
search of the Enlightenment for regularity occasioned the study of 
historical case material in several fields that could be seen to in-
stantiate such regularities. Thus the archetype of a more free reli-
giosity was found in primitive Christianity, and this re-enforced its 
study by Thomasius,x
1 Bohmer, and Semler. The rules established 
by the art criticism of this age were re-enforced by the close exam-
ination of the typical in ancient Greek and Roman art, and this 
was the perspective from which Winckelmann and Lessing al-
lowed ancient art and the laws of artistic creativity to illuminate 
each other. Another moment full of import for the future lies in 
r85 
the realization that the detailed examination of the individual per-
son leads to a stress on the individuality of creativity and genius. 
If we ask how amidst the flow of events that surges through 
Germany, constantly and unceasingly producing changes, one can 
nevertheless delineate such a unity, then the preliminary answer is 
that each productive system carries its own law within itself. Ac-
cordingly, the epochs of one productive system will be quite differ-
ent from those of other productive systems. Thus music has its 
own rate of movement: the religious style deriving from the high-
est power of the Christian experience reached its pinnacle in Bach 
and Handel at the same time that the Enlightenment already was 
81 Christian Thomasius (r655-I728), German jurist and philosopher; sought in-
dependence of philosophy from theology. His works include Institutiones jurispru-
dentiae divinae and Fundamenta juris naturae et gentium. 
206 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
the dominant direction in Germany. And at the same time that 
Lessing's most perfect works were produced, the new creative 
movement of Sturm und Drang emerges to herald the beginning of 
the next epoch in literature. When we ask further what is the basic 
relation that establishes a unity among various productive sys-
tems, the answer is not a unity that could be expressed by any 
basic idea but rather something more like a nexus or link that 
establishes itself among the tendencies of life as they develop. 
It is possible to delineate within the course of history, time spans 
in which a basic disposition of life and the highest ideas come 
together, reach a peak unity, only to disperse again. Each such 
time span exhibits a common, inner structure that determines the 
relations between the parts of the whole, their temporal course, 
and the modifications in general tendencies. We will see later what 
the comparative method can contribute to such a structural per-
spective. 
The enduring efficacy of general structural relationships is what 
above all produces the meaning and sense of history for us. The 
way in which these structural relationships hold sway at every 
time, at every point, and determine human life, provides an initial 
sense of the spiritual world. Our task is to study systematically 
and from the ground up the regularities that exhibit the structure 
of a productive system in its carriers, starting with individuals and 
moving upwards. The extent to which these structural laws enable 
us to make predictions about the future can be determined only 
when this foundation has been laid. What is immutable and regu-
lar in historical processes is the first object of study, and condi-
tions the answer to all questions about progress in history and 
about the direction in which human life is moving. 
186 
The structure of a specific period proves to be a nexus of single, 
partial systems and movements within the overall goings-on of an 
age. A complex whole is formed from extremely diverse and change-
able moments, and this whole determines the meaning assigned to 
everything that is going on in this period. When the spirit of such 
a period is born out of pains and dissonances, every single aspect 
of it receives its meaning in and through it. Great historical per-
sonages are especially likely to be influenced by such situations. 
They create not in terms of long-term, historical considerations 
but by drawing their goals from the values and significance of 
their own age. The productive energy of a nation in a specific time 
derives its highest power from precisely this fact, that .its people 
are limited by the horizon of their age. Their work is devoted to 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
207 
the realization of the basic direction of their time and, accordingly, 
they become its representatives. 
Everything in a historical period derives its meaning through the 
energy drawn from its overall direction. This energy is expressed 
in stone or on canvas, in deeds or through words. It is objectified 
in the constitutions and the legislation of nations. Moved by this 
energy, the historian grasps past ages and the philosopher attempts 
to interpret the sense of the world. All manifestations of the en-
ergy that determines an age are akin to each other. This engenders 
the task of analysis, which is to recognize a unity of value-deter-
mination and purposive direction in a multiplicity of manifesta-
tions of life. When the life-manifestations of such a tendency press 
onward to absolute values and determinate ends, the circle that 
encompasses the people of this period becomes constricting; for it 
also contains resistant tendencies. We saw that an age also im-
poses its stamp on these opposed tendencies and that the domi-
nant direction suppresses their free development. Thus the overall 
productive system of an age is determined from within by the 
nexus of life, social atmosphere, value-formation, and goal-setting 
that characterizes that age. Every action that engages this nexus is 
historical. This nexus constitutes the horizon of the time and it 
ultimately determines the meaning of each part of this temporal 
system. The way in which ages and epochs are centered in them-
selves solves the problem of the sense and meaning of history. 
Every age refers back to the preceding age, takes up the forces 
that were developed in it, and simultaneously, it already contains 
the stirring and the creativity that prepares for the succeeding age. 
Just as it arose from the insufficiency of an earlier age, so it 
r87 
carries within itself the limits, tensions, and suffering that prepare 
for the future age. Since each configuration of historical life is fi-
nite, it must contain a distribution of joyous force and constraint, 
of the expansion of existence and provinciality, of satisfaction and 
need. The peak efficacy of its basic thrust is always brief. And as 
we move from one time to another, there is a hunger for all kinds 
of satisfaction that can never be fulfilled. 
One result of our investigations about the relations between the 
historical ages and periods with reference to the increasing com-
plexity in the structure of historical life is the recognition of the 
finitude of all historical configurations, namely, that they are bur-
dened with existential curtailment, oppression, and unfulfilled 
longing. This is especially the case because power relations can 
never be eliminated from the coexistence of psychophysical beings. 
208 
THE FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
The Enlightenment ideal of autocracy produced wars arising from 
diplomatic rivalry and the exploitation of subjects for the luxu-
rious life of the courts just as much as a striving for the rational 
development of our powers. Similarly, every other arrangement of 
power-relations also encompasses a duality of effects. Finally, the 
sense of history can only be sought in the meaning-relation of all 
the productive forces that have been woven into the nexus o-f the 
ages. 
THE SYSTEMATIC EXAMINATION OF PRODUCTIVE 
SYSTEMS AND COMMONALITIES 
Since the understanding of history comes about by means of ap-
plying the systematic human sciences to it, the above account of 
the logical nexus of history has already treated the general features 
of the system of the human sciences; This is because the overall 
examination of the productive systems that have been articulated 
in history has as its goal the grounding of the essence of these 
productive systems. I stress the following three preliminary per-
spectives for this systematic examination. 
The study of society depends on the analysis of the productive 
systems that are part of history. This analysis proceeds from the 
concrete to the abstract, from the scientific study of the natural 
articulation of the human race and its peoples to the division of 
the various sciences of culture and the separation of the domains 
of the external organization of society. 82 
188 
Each cultural system forms a nexus that is based on common-
alities; because the nexus realizes a function, it has a teleological 
character. But there is a difficulty in conceptualizing the sciences of 
these cultural systems. The individuals who cooperate in such a 
function belong to the cultural system only through those pro-
cesses by which they contribute to the realization of the function. 
Nevertheless, they participate in these processes with their whole 
being, which means that a domain based purely on the system's 
functional purpose can never be constructed. Rather, other aspects 
of human nature are also constantly at work in this domain sup-
plementing the energies devoted to the system's functions. Here 
lies the basic logical problem of the science of the cultural systems, 
"2 This is treated more extensively in my Introduction to the Human Sciences. 
(D) See SW I, 87-136. 
THE SYSTEM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
209 
and we will see that various and conflicting methods have been 
developed to deal with this problem. 
Beyond this difficulty, there is a limit pertaining to concept-
formation in the human sciences. It derives from the fact that pro-
ductive systems are teleological and attempt to achieve something. 
Concept-formation here is therefore not a simple generalization 
that secures what is common from a series of particular cases. The 
concept expresses a type and emerges through a comparative pro-
cedure. Assume that I want to define the concept of science. In the 
abstract, every thought-nexus that aims to make a contribution to 
conceptual cognition can be included. However, among the books 
devoted to scientific tasks, many are unproductive, many illogical 
and unsuccessful. They thus contradict their intention to make a 
cognitive contribution. Concept-formation must bring out those 
features by which the function of such a thought-nexus is actually 
realized: that is the task of a theory of science. Or when I want to 
define the concept of poetry, this too requires a conceptual con-
struction that will not cover all verses. The manifold of phenom-
ena belonging to such a domain is grouped around a central point, 
which constitutes the ideal case in which the function of poetry is 
completely realized. 
This ends the examination of the general system of the human 
sciences. The remaining discussion of the formation of the human 
sciences will develop the particular methods through which this 
general, logical system is realized. 
BLANK PAGE 
PART III 
PLAN FOR THE CONTINUATION OF THE 
rs9 
FORMATION OF THE HISTORICAL 
WORLD IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
TRANSLATED BY 
RUDOLF A. MAKKREEL AND WILLIAM H. OMAN 
BLANK PAGE 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
OF HISTORICAL REASON 
SECTION ONE: LIVED EXPERIENCE, EXPRESSION, 
AND UNDERSTANDING 
I. Lived Experience and Autobiography 
I. THE TASK OF A CRITIQUE OF HISTORICAL REASON 
The connectedness of the world of human spirit dawns in the sub-
ject and yet there is a progression of spirit that connects the partic-
ular logical processes whereby the overall meaning of this world is 
determined. On the one hand, this world of spirit is the creation of 
the apprehending subject; on the other hand, there is a progression 
of spirit directed at an objective knowledge of this world. Thus we 
confront the problem of how the formation of the world of spirit 
in the subject makes possible the knowledge of spiritual reality. I 
have already called this the task of a Critique of Historical Rea-
son. This task can be achieved only if the particular functions that 
cooperate in the creation of this whole can be sorted out and if it 
can be shown what part each of them plays, both in the formation 
of the historical course in the world of spirit and in the discovery 
of its systematic nature. It remains to be seen how far the diffi-
culties inherent in the mutual dependence of these truths can be 
solved. The real principle of conceptualization in the human sci-
ences will be derived from experience in a gradual manner. 
Understanding is a rediscovery of the I in the Thou; spirit redis-
covers itself at ever higher levels of connectedness; this selfsame-
ness of spirit in the I and the Thou, in each subject of a commu-
nity, in each cultural system, and finally, in the totality of spirit 
and universal history, makes possible the cooperation of the var-
ious functions of the human sciences. The knowing subject is, 
here, one with its object, and this holds for all stages of its objec-
tification. If, in this way, we can recognize the objectivity of the 
world of human spirit as created in the subject, then the question 
arises how much this can contribute to solving the problem of 
epistemology in general. Kant tackled this problem by starting 
192. 
214 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
with formal logic and mathematics. Formal logic, in the time of 
Kant, regarded the ultimate abstractions of logic- the laws and 
forms of thought- as the ultimate logical ground for the justifica-
tion of all scientific statements. The laws and forms of thought, 
above all judgment, from which he derived the categories con-
tained for Kant the conditions of conceptual cognition. To these 
conditions he added those that, according to him, made mathema-
tics possible. The magnitude of his achievement lay in his complete 
analysis of mathematical and scientific knowledge. The question, 
however, is whether an epistemology of history, which he himself 
did not provide, is possible within the framework of his concepts. 
2. REFLEXIVE AWARENESS, REALITY: TIME 
I am presupposing what I have said before about life and lived 
experience. We must now demonstrate the reality of what is ap-
prehended in lived experience. As we are concerned here with the 
objective value of the categories of the world of human spirit as 
they first emerge from lived experience, I shall make a preliminary 
remark about the sense in which the term "category" is being used 
here. The predicates that we attribute to objects encompass kinds 
or modes of apprehension. The concepts designating these modes I 
call categories. Each mode of apprehension contains one rule of 
relating experience. The categories are systematically related to 
each other, and the highest categories represent the highest points 
of view for apprehending reality. Each such category designates its 
own universe of predications. The formal categories are forms for 
making assertions about all of reality. Among the real categories 
are those that originate in the apprehension of the world of hu-
man spirit, even though they are also transformed to apply to the 
whole of reality. General predicates about a specific individual's 
experiential nexus already emerge from lived experience. But when 
they are applied to the objectifications of life in understanding and 
to all the subjects of the assertions of the human sciences, the 
scope of their validity is increased until it becomes clear that the 
life of spirit can everywhere be characterized in terms of produc-
tive systems, force, value, etc. Thus these general predicates attain 
the dignity of categories of the world of spirit. 
Temporality is contained in life as its first categorial determina-
tion and the one that is fundamental for all the others. The expres-
sion "passage of life" already points to this temporality. Time is 
there for us by means of the gathering unity of our consciousness. 
r93 
Life, and the external objects encompassed by it, share the rela-
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
215 
tionships of simultaneity, succession, time interval, duration, and 
change. It is from them that the mathematical natural sciences de-
rived the abstract relations on which Kant based his doctrine of 
the phenomenal nature of time. 
This [mathematical] framework of temporal relationships em-
braces, but does not exhaust, the lived experience of time through 
which the concept receives its ultimate fulfillment. Here time is 
experienced as the restless advance of the present, in which what 
is present constantly becomes past and the future present. The 
present is the fullness of a moment of time being filled with reality; 
it is reality as distinct from memory or representations of the fu-
ture as found in wishes, expectations, hopes, fears, and strivings. 
This being filled with reality characteristic of the present occurs 
continually, while the content of lived experience constantly 
changes. The representations by which we possess the past and the 
future are there only for us as we live in the present. The present is 
always there, and nothing is there except what emerges in it. The 
ship of our life is carried forward on a constantly moving stream, 
as it were, and the present is always wherever we enter these waves 
with whatever we suffer, remember, and hope, that is, whenever 
we live in the fullness of our reality. We constantly sail into this 
stream, and the moment the future becomes the present, it also 
begins to sink into the past. The parts of fulfilled time are quali-
tatively different from each other; even apart from their content, 
they have a different character according to whether we look from 
the present back to the past or forward to the future. Looking 
back we have a series of memory images graded according to their 
value for our consciousness and the interest of our feelings; like a 
row of houses or trees receding into the distance and becoming 
smaller, the line of memories becomes less vivid, until the images 
are lost in the darkness of the horizon. And the more components, 
such as states of mind, outer events, means, and goals, insert them-
selves between the fullness of the present and a moment of the 
future, the greater is the number of possible outcomes and the 
more indefinite and nebulous the image of this future becomes. 
When we look back at the past, we are passive; it cannot be changed. 
In vain does the person already determined by it assail it with 
dreams of how it could have been different. But in our attitude to 
the future we are active and free. Here the category of reality that 
194 
emerges from the present is joined by that of possibility. We feel 
that we have infinite possibilities. Thus the lived experience of 
time determines the content of our lives in all directions. This is 
why the doctrine that time is merely ideal makes no sense in the 
216 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
human sciences. It would mean that behind life itself, with all its 
temporal fretting about the past, all its longings and free, active 
claims on the future, all its despair about the necessities stemming 
therefrom, all the striving, work, and purposes that stretch into 
the future, all the formation and development encompassed by the 
temporal course of life, there lies as its condition a shadowy realm 
of timelessness that is not lived. But it is in this life of ours that the 
reality known in the human sciences lies. 
The antinomies that thought discovers in the lived experience of 
time spring from its cognitive impenetrability. Even the smallest part 
of the advance of time still involves the passing of time. The present 
never is; what we experience as present always contains the memory 
of what has just been present. Among other things, the continued 
efficacy of the past as a force in the present, namely, what the past 
means for it, imparts to what is remembered a distinctive character 
of presence, whereby it becomes incorporated in the present. That 
which forms a unity of presence in the flow of time because it has a 
unitary meaning is the smallest unit definable as a lived experience. 
Each more comprehensive unity of the parts of a life that is linked 
by a common meaning we also call a "lived experience," even when 
the parts are separated by intervening events. 
A lived experience is a temporal sequence in which every state is 
in flux before it can become a distinct object. Indeed, because the 
subsequent moment always builds on the previous one, each be-
comes something past before it can be grasped. It then appears as 
a memory that has the freedom to expand. But observation de-
stroys lived experience. Thus there is nothing more puzzling than 
the kind of continuum or nexus known as a piece of life-history. 
The only thing that remains constant about this nexus is that its 
form is a structural relation. And if we wanted, through a special 
195 
kind of effort, to experience the stream of life itself as reflecting its 
bank, always seeming the same, but never really, according to Her-
aclitus- a case of the many and the one- then we would fall prey 
again to the law of life according to which every moment of life 
that is observed, no matter how much the flow is concentrated on, 
is a remembered moment and no longer a flow; it is arrested by 
attention~ which fixes what is essentially fluid. Thus we cannot 
grasp the essence of this life. What the youth of Sais unveils is 
form and not life. 1 We must be aware of this if we are to grasp the 
categories that emerge from life itself. 
1 Dilthey refers to a poem by Schiller about a youth in the ancient Egyptian city 
of Sais who unveiled the statue of truth. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
217 
Because of this characteristic of real time, temporal succession 
cannot, strictly speaking, be experienced. The presence of the past 
replaces immediate experience for us. When we want to observe 
time, the act of observation destroys it because it fixes things by 
means of attentiveness; it halts the flow and rigidifies what is in 
the process of becoming. We experience both the changes in what-
just-was and that such changes are occurring. But we do not expe-
rience the flux itself. Permanence is experienced when we return to 
what we have just seen or heard and find it still there. Change is 
experienced when particular qualities of a composite whole have 
become different, and when we turn to that in ourselves that expe-
riences duration and change, namely, the reflexive awareness of 
our own self, it is no different; nor is it with introspection .... 
The course of a life consists of parts, of lived experiences that 
are inwardly connected with each other. Each lived experience re-
lates to a self of which it is a part; it is structurally linked with 
other parts to form a nexus. Everything having to do with spirit 
manifests this connectedness of a nexus. Interconnectedness is thus 
a category that stems from life itself. We apprehend the connected-
ness of a nexus through the unity of consciousness, which is the 
condition of all apprehension. But it is clear that the existence of a 
nexus or connectedness is not merely the product of a manifold of 
experiences being presented to a unitary consciousness. It is only 
because life itself is a structural nexus in which lived experiences 
stand in experienceable relations that the connectedness of life is 
given to us. This connectedness is apprehended in terms of a more 
comprehensive category that is a form of predication applicable to 
all of reality- the relation of whole and parts. 2 
The life of spirit manifests itself on the base of what is physical 
r96 
and represents the highest evolutionary stage on earth. The condi-
tions under which the life of spirit emerges are developed by natu-
ral science in that it discovers a lawful order in physical phenom-
ena. The human body appears among other phenomenally given 
bodies, but it has a special relation to lived experience that cannot 
be further specified. With lived experience we move from the world 
of physical phenomena into the realm of spiritual reality, which is 
the subject matter of the human sciences and of reflection on 
them ... . 3 The cognitive value of this realm is fully independent 
of the study of their physical conditions. 
Knowledge of the world of human spirit comes about through 
1 The rest is undecipherable. (H) 
1 Some undecipherable words follow. (H) 
218 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
the cooperation between lived experience, the understanding of 
other persons, the historical comprehension of commonalities as 
subjects of historical efficacy, and finally, objective spirit. Lived 
experience stands as their ultimate presupposition, and thus we 
ask what function it fulfills. 
Lived experience encompasses elementary operations of thought. 
I have designated this as its intellectuality. These operations occur 
when consciousness is intensified. A change in a mental state of 
affairs leads to the consciousness of difference. In that which changes, 
an isolated state is apprehended. Experiencing is followed by judg-
ments that objectify what has been experienced. It is unnecessary 
to explicate how we obtain our familiarity with every human situ-
ation solely from lived experience. A feeling that we have not ex-
perienced ourselves we cannot find again in someone else. It is 
decisive for the development of the human sciences that the sub-
ject whose bodily limits contain the possibility of lived experiences 
be described in terms of general predicates and attributes derived 
from lived experience that can also serve as the point of departure 
for the categories of the human sciences. We saw that the formal 
categories spring from the elementary operations of thought. They 
are concepts that re-present what can be apprehended through 
these operations of thought. Such concepts are unity, plurality, 
identity, difference, degree, and relation. They are attributes of the 
whole of reality. The real categories ... 
3· THE LIFE-NEXUS 
A new trait of life becomes visible at this point; it is conditioned 
by the character of its temporality as already explicated, but goes 
beyond it. We approach life, our own as well as that of others, 
through understanding. This attitude of understanding demands 
distinctive categories that are foreign to the cognition of nature as 
r97 
such. If the scientific cognition of nature makes use of the concept 
of purpose for the stages in the organic world that precede human 
life, it borrows this category from human life. 
The formal categories are abstract expressions for the logical 
operations of distinguishing, identifying, apprehending degrees of 
difference, connecting, and separating. They provide, as it were, a 
higher degree of awareness or discernment, which merely ascer-
tains; no a priori construction is involved. They already appear in 
primary or elementary thought and then validate themselves as the 
same, but at a higher level, in discursive thought, which is tied to 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
219 
signs. They are thus the formal conditions for understanding as 
well as for conceptual cognition, for the human sciences as well as 
for the natural sciences. 
The real categories, by contrast, are nowhere the same in the 
human sciences and in the natural sciences. I shall not enter into 
the problems concerning the origin of these categories. Here only 
their validity is at issue. No real category can claim the validity it 
has in the natural sciences for the human sciences as well. If the 
abstract procedure expressed in a natural science category is trans-
ferred to the human sciences, then the natural sciences transgress 
their limits. This is just as objectionable as when natural science 
imports a spiritual nexus into nature, which is what led to the 
philosophy of nature of Schelling and Hegel. In the historical world 
there is no natural science causality, for a cause, in this sense, 
implies that it produces effects that are necessitated in accordance 
with laws; history only knows of relationships of agency and suf-
fering, action and reaction. 
No matter how natural science in the future may rethink the 
concept of substances as carriers of what happens or that of forces 
as bringing it about and transform them into new concepts, all 
such conceptualizations of the natural sciences are irrelevant to 
the human sciences. The subjects of historical assertions- ranging 
from the individual life-course to that of humanity- designate 
merely a special kind of nexus that has been delimited. And al-
though the formal category of the relation between whole and 
part is common to any nexus- whether it pertains to space, time, 
organized beings, or history- it first acquires its own meaning in 
the realm of the human sciences from the nature of life and the 
process of understanding appropriate to it, namely, that of a nexus 
in which the parts are interconnected. Organic life must, accord-
ing to the evolutionary character of reality as given in our experi-
r98 
ence, be viewed as an intermediary link between inorganic nature 
and the historical world and thus as a preliminary stage of the 
latter. 
What, then, is this distinctive sense in which the parts of the life 
of mankind are linked into a whole? What are the categories through 
which we come to understand and master this whole? 
Let us consider autobiographies, which are the most direct ex-
pression of reflection about life. Augustine, Rousseau, and Goethe 
exhibit its typical forms. How, then, did these writers understand 
the nexus of the various parts of their own life-course? Augustine 
is fully devoted to the connectedness of his existence with God. 
220 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
His text is, at one and the same time, religious meditation, prayer, 
and narrative. His narrative has its goal in the event of his conver-
sion, and every earlier occurrence is only a way station on the 
road to this goal in which the design of providence for this human 
being is fulfilled. No sensual enjoyment, no philosophical joy, no 
rhetorical pleasure in eloquence, and no life-relationship have any 
intrinsic value for him. In all of these, he feels a positive life-value 
strangely mixed with a longing for a transcendent relationship; 
they are all transitory, and only in the conversion does an eternal 
relation, untainted by suffering, come into being. Thus the under-
standing of his life consists in relating its parts to the realization of 
an absolute value, an unconditional highest good. When looking 
back, he sees the meaning of every earlier life-moment in terms of 
this relation: He does not find development in his life, but prepa-
ration for the renunciation of all that is transitory. 
As for Rousseau, the way he related himself to his life in the 
Confessions can only be comprehended through the same catego-
ries of meaning, value, sense, and purpose. All of France swarmed 
with rumors about his marriage and his past. In dreadful loneli-
ness he considered the incessant efforts of his enemies against him, 
making him misanthropic to the point of persecution mania. When 
he looked back in memory, he saw himself driven from his strict 
Calvinistic home, struggling upwards from a life of ignoble adven-
ture toward the actualization of the greatness that lay dormant in 
him, soiled on the way by the dirt of the streets, forced to put up 
with bad food of all descriptions, and impotent in the face of the 
domination of the elegant world and the leading intellectuals around 
199 
him. But whatever he had done and suffered and whatever was 
corrupt in him, he saw himself- and this, after all, was the ideal 
of his age- as a noble, high-minded soul whose feelings were al-
lied with humanity. This he wanted to show the world; he wanted 
to justify his spiritual existence by showing it fully as it was. Here 
again the external events of a life-course are interpreted. A nexus 
is sought that is not merely one of cause and effect. To describe it 
we can only find such words as "value," "purpose," "sense," and 
"meaning." When we look more closely, we see that the inter-
pretation consists of a distinctive interrelation of these categories 
reflecting his own concerns. Rousseau wanted, above all, to have 
the legitimacy of his individual existence recognized. This contains 
a new intuitive insight into the infinite possibilities of actualizing 
life-values. It is on the basis of this insight that the constellation of 
categories used by him to understand life took shape. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
221 
And now we turn to Goethe: in Dichtung und Wahrheit a hu-
man being looks at his own existence from the standpoint of uni-
versal history. Throughout he sees himself in the context of the 
literary movement of his age and manifests a calm, proud sense of 
his place within it. Thus to the old man looking back, every mo-
ment of his existence is doubly significant, both as enjoyed fullness 
of life and as a productive force affecting the whole of his life. 
Whether in Leipzig, Strasbourg, or Frankfurt, he feels each present 
as filled and determined by the past and as aiming to shape the 
future, that is, as development. Here we can see more deeply into 
the relations between the categories as the instruments of under-
standing life. The sense of life lies in giving shape to things and in 
development; on its basis the meaning of the moments of life is 
determined in a distinctive way; it is both the experienced, intrin-
sic, value of the moment and its productive force. 
Each life has its own sense. It consists in a meaning-context in 
which every remembered present possesses an intrinsic value, and 
yet, through the nexus of memory, it is also related to the sense of 
the whole. This sense of individual human existence is unique and 
cannot be fathomed by conceptual cognition; yet, in its way, like a 
Leibnizian monad, it represents the historical universe. 
4· AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
In autobiography we encounter the highest and most instructive 
form of the understanding of life. Here a life-course stands as an 
2oo 
external phenomenon from which understanding seeks to discover 
what produced it within a particular environment. The person 
who understands it is the same as the one who created it. This 
results in a particular intimacy of understanding. The same person 
who seeks the overall coherence of the story of his life has already 
produced a life-nexus according to various perspectives, namely, in 
the ways he has felt the values of his life, actualized its purposes, 
worked out a life plan, either genetically when looking back or 
prospectively when looking forward to a highest good. These var-
ious ways of producing a life-nexus must now be articulated as a 
life-history. The person's memory has highlighted and accentuated 
those life-moments that were experienced as significant; others 
have been allowed to sink into forgetfulness. Momentary mistakes 
about the meaning of his life are corrected by the future. Thus the 
initial tasks involved in apprehending and explicating a historical 
nexus are already half solved by life itself. The constituents of this 
222 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
nexus can be found in conceptions of lived experience in which 
present and past events are held together by a common meaning. 
Among these lived experiences, those that have a special worth, 
both for themselves and for the overall life-nexus, have been pre-
served by memory and raised from the endless stream of forgotten 
events. A coherence is formed within life itself, albeit from differ-
ent standpoints and with constant shifts. The work of historical 
narrative is already half done by life itself. Lived experiences pro-
vide its constituents; from the infinite plurality of them, a selection 
of what is worth narrating has been prepared. And between these 
parts a connection is seen, which, to be sure, neither is, nor is 
intended to be, a simple copy of the actual passage of a life of so 
many years, but which, because understanding is involved, ex-
presses what an individual life knows about its own connectedness. 
Here we approach the roots of all historical comprehension. 
Autobiography is merely the literary expression of the self-reflec-
tion of human beings on their life-course. Such self-reflection re-
news itself to some extent in every individual. It is always there 
and expresses itself in ever new forms. It is found in the verses of 
Solon as well as in the introspection of Stoic philosophers, in the 
2or 
meditations of the saints and in the modern philosophy of life. It 
alone makes historical insight possible. The power and scope of 
our own lives and the energy with which we reflect on them pro-
vide the basis of historical vision. Self-reflection alone enables us 
to give a second life to the bloodless shadows of the past. In com-
bination with a boundless need to surrender to, and lose oneself 
in, the existence of others, it makes the great historian. 
What is it, then, that constitutes a connectedness in the exam-
ination of one's own life-course, and links the parts into a whole 
in which life attains understanding? The understanding of life re-
quires, in addition to the general categories of thought, those of 
value, purpose, and meaning. Broad concepts such as that of the 
shaping and development of human life are subsumed under these. 
Differences among these three categories are determined first of all 
by the temporal standpoint from which the passage of a life is 
apprehended. 
When we look back through memory, we see the nexus of the 
past parts of a life-course in terms of the category of meaning. 
When we live in the present, the positive or negative value of the 
realities that fill it are experienced through feeling. And when we 
face the future, the category of purpose arises through a projective 
attitude. We interpret life as the actualization of some overriding 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
223 
purpose to which all particular purposes are subordinated, that is, 
as the realization of a highest good. None of these categories can 
be subordinated to the others, because each of them makes the 
whole of life accessible to the understanding from a different per-
spective. In this sense they are incommensurable. 
And yet we can differentiate the way they are related to the 
understanding of a life-course. The intrinsic values experienced in, 
and only in, the lived experience of the present are accessible to 
experience in a primordial way, but they stand juxtaposed to each 
other without any connection. For each of them arises in the con-
cern of a subject for an object accessible to it in the present. (By 
contrast, when we set ourselves a purpose, we relate ourselves to 
the representation of an object that is to be brought about.) Thus 
the intrinsic values of the experienced present stand juxtaposed 
and unconnected; they can only be assessed when they are com-
pared with each other. Anything else described as valuable must be 
referred back to intrinsic values. When we ascribe an objective 
value to something, this means merely that various values can be 
experienced in relation to it. When we ascribe an instrumental 
value to an object, we merely designate it as capable of bringing 
202 
about some value at a subsequent point of time. All these are 
purely logical relations into which a value, experienced in the 
present, can enter. From the point of view of value, life thus ap-
pears as an infinite multiplicity of positive and negative existential 
values. It is like a chaos of harmonies and dissonances. Each of 
them is like a chord that fills a present, but they have no musical 
relation to each other. The category of purpose, or of the good, 
which considers life as it is directed toward the future, presup-
poses that of value. But this category too cannot bring out the 
connectedness of the life-nexus, for the relations of purposes to 
each other are only those of possibility, choice, and subordination. 
Only the category of meaning overcomes the mere juxtaposition 
or subordination of the parts of life to each other. As history is 
memory and as the category of meaning belongs to memory, this is 
the most distinctive category of historical thought. It will be espe-
cially important to explicate its gradual development. 
SUPPLEMENT TO 3: THE LIFE-NEXUS 
It is here that, together with the categories of agency and suffer-
ing, the category of productive force arises. Agency and suffering 
are, as we saw, the basis of the principle of causality in the natural 
224 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
sciences. The principle of causality receives its strict formulation in 
mechanics.4 In the natural sciences, force is a hypothetical concept. 
If its validity is assumed there, it is determined by the principle of 
causality. In the human sciences, productive force is the categorial 
expression of something that can be experienced. It arises when 
we turn toward the future and does so in different ways: in 
dreams of future happiness, in the play of the imagination with 
possibilities, in indecision, and in fear. But then we bring such 
leisurely expansion of our existence to a distinct focal point, and 
amidst such possibilities we decide to actualize one of them. The 
representation of a purpose that then emerges contains something 
new that did not yet exist in the sphere of reality and now must 
enter it. What is involved here- quite independent of any theory 
of the will- is a straining, which a psychologist may interpret 
physiologically, a directedness at a goal, or the emergence of an 
intention to actualize something that was not already part of real-
ity, selecting among possibilities and intending to actualize one of 
203 
them5 ••• choosing the means for bringing it about and finally 
actually bringing it about. Insofar as the life-nexus generates such 
sequences, we call it a productive force. 
This category of productive force is critical for the human sci-
ences. Wherever these sciences reach, they deal with the connect-
edness of some whole. We take it for granted that it can be de-
scribed in terms of stable states; but insofar as historians seek to 
understand and express change, they must do so through concepts 
that express energy, directions of movement, and shifts of histori-
cal forces. The more that historical concepts take on this character 
of productive force, the better will they express the nature of their 
objects. Whatever it is in a concept that serves to fix an object and 
give it a timeless validity belongs merely to its logical form. This is 
why it is important to form concepts that express the freedom of 
life and history. Hobbes frequently says that life is continuous 
movement. Leibniz and Wolff assert that happiness, for both the 
individual and the community, lies in the consciousness of pro-
gressive movement. 
All these categories of life and history are forms of judgment 
that become generally applicable to the domain of the human sci-
ences- if not always in judgments about what can be experienced, 
then through development with other functions. They originate 
• See Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW I, 232-34. 
5 The next words are undecipherable. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
225 
from lived experience itself. They are not the kinds of form that 
are imposed on it, but the structural forms of life itself in its tem-
poral flow come to expression in them based on the formal opera-
tions grounded in the unity of consciousness. What, then, is the 
subject of these categories of the sphere of lived experience? It is 
primarily the passage of a life that takes place in a human body 
and that, as a self, with its intentions and their being restrained by 
pressure from the external world, is distinguished from what is 
outside, impossible to experience, and strange. But it is more 
closely defined by the predications already explicated; and so all 
our judgments about the sphere of lived experience insofar as they 
refer to a life-course and express its predicates are at first merely 
predications about this specific life-course. They achieve the char-
acter of commonality and generality by having objective spirit as 
their background and insight into other persons as their constant 
correlate. 
The understanding of one's own life-course takes place through 
a final group of categories that differs essentially from the pre-
204 
vious group, which still had some affinities with the categories of 
the knowledge of nature. Now we are confronted with categories 
that have nothing in the natural sciences to compare them with.
6 
The comprehension and interpretation of one's own life goes 
through a long series of stages; its most complete explication is 
autobiography. Here the self apprehends its own life-course in 
such a way that it brings to consciousness the human substrates 
and the historical relations with which it is interwoven. Auto-
biography can thus gradually expand to become a historical por-
trait. The only thing that limits autobiography, but this is at the 
same time the source of its special meaning, is the fact that it is 
carried by lived experience and makes its own self and its relation 
to the world understandable from this deep level. Reflection of 
human beings about themselves remains the point of reference and 
basis [for such understanding]. 
'' For instance, the categories of meaning and value. The discussion of categories 
is taken up in "The Categories of Life" below, 248-64. 
205 
II. The Understanding of Other Persons 
and Their Manifestations of Life 
The method pervading the human sciences is that of understand-
ing and interpretation. All the functions and truths of the human 
sciences are gathered in understanding. At every point it is under-
standing that opens up a world. 
On the basis of lived experience and self-understanding and 
their constant interaction, there emerges the understanding of 
other persons and their manifestations of life. Here too we are not 
dealing with logical construction or psychological analysis but 
with analysis of interest for a theory of knowledge. Our task is to 
establish what the understanding of others can contribute to his-
torical knowledge. 
I. MANIFESTATIONS OF LIFE 
The givens of history are always manifestations of life. They ap-
pear in the world of the senses, but express something spiritual, 
which they make it possible for us to cognize. By manifestations of 
life I mean not only these expressions that intend something or are 
meant to mean something but also those that without any such 
intent to express spirit nevertheless make it understandable. 
Understanding will differ in kind and scope in relation to differ-
ent classes of manifestations of life. 
The first of these classes consists of concepts, judgments, and 
larger thought-formations. As constituents of science, they have 
been detached from the lived experience in which they arose, and 
they possess the common basic trait of having been adapted to 
logical norms. This gives them a selfsameness independent of their 
position in the context of thought. A judgment asserts the validity 
of what is thought independently of changes in the way it arose, 
whether the difference be that of the time or the people involved. 
This is also the meaning of the principle of identity. Thus a judg-
ment is the same for the person who formulates it and the one 
who understands it; it is, as it were, transported unchanged from 
the possession of the speaker to that of the one who understands 
it. This defines what characterizes the understanding of every log-
2o6 
ically perfect system of thought. Here understanding is directed at 
the mere logical content, which remains identical in every context, 
and is more complete than in relation to any other manifestation 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
227 
of life. At the same time, however, such understanding does not 
disclose how the logical content that has been thought is related to 
the dark background and the fullness of psychic life. There is no 
indication of the peculiarities of the life from which it arose, and it 
follows from its specific character that it does not set up any ex-
pectation to go back to any psychic nexus. 
Actions form another class of manifestations of life. An action 
does not derive from the intention to communicate. But in accor-
dance with the relation in which an action stands to a purpose, 
this is given in it. There is a regular relation of concern between an 
action and what it expresses of the human spirit that allows us to 
make probable assumptions about it. However, it is always neces-
sary to distinguish the situationally conditioned state of mind that 
produced the action and whose expression it is from the life-nexus 
itself in which the state of mind is grounded. Through the power 
of a decisive motive, a deed moves from the fullness of life into 
one-sidedness. However much we may have deliberated before 
acting, the deed expresses only a part of our being. Possibilities 
that resided in this being are annihilated by the deed. So action 
too detaches itself from the background of the life-nexus. Apart 
from the elucidation of how a situation, a purpose, means, and a 
life-nexus intersect in an action, it allows no inclusive determina-
tion of the inner life from which it arose. 
It is quite different with the expression of lived experience. A 
special relation exists between it, the life from which it stems, and 
the understanding that it brings about. An expression of lived ex-
perience can contain more of the nexus of psychic life than any 
introspection can catch sight of. It draws from depths not illumi-
nated by consciousness. But at the same time, it is characteristic of 
the expression of lived experience that its relation to the spiritual 
or human content expressed in it can only be made available to 
understanding within limits. Such expressions are not to be judged 
as true or false but as truthful or untruthful. For here dissimula-
tion, lying, and deception sever the relation between the expres-
sion and the spiritual meaning expressed. 
An important distinction begins to emerge here, and on its basis 
we can assert the highest significance for expressions of lived expe-
rience in the human sciences. What stems from daily life is subject 
to the power of its interests. The interpretation of what constantly 
207 
falls into oblivion is also determined by the moment. There is 
something frightful in the realization that in the struggle of practi-
cal interests, every expression can deceive and that its interpreta-
228 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
tion can alter with a change in our standpoint. But when in a great 
work a spiritual content is liberated from its creator, whether it be 
a poet, artist, or writer, we enter a realm where deception ends. 
No truly great work of art can, according to the relations that 
apply here and that will be developed later, want to put forward a 
spiritual content that misrepresents its author; indeed, it does not 
want to say anything about its author. Truthful in itself, it stands-
fixed, visible, and abiding- and it is this that makes possible 
a methodically reliable understanding of such works. Thus there 
arises in the confines between knowing and doing a sphere in 
which life discloses itself at a depth inaccessible to observation, 
reflection, and theory. 7 
2. ELEMENTARY FORMS OF UNDERSTANDING 
Understanding comes about, first of all, through the interests of 
practical life where persons rely on interchange and communica-
tion. They must make themselves understandable to each other. 
One person must know what the other wants. This is how the 
elementary forms of understanding originate. They are like the let-
ters of the alphabet that combine to make higher forms of un-
derstanding possible. By such an elementary form, I mean the in-
terpretation of a single manifestation of life. Logically it can be 
explicated as an inference by analogy. Such an inference is medi-
ated by a regular relation between a manifestation of life and what 
is expressed in it. In each of the three classes, individual life-mani-
festations can be interpreted in this way. A series of letters com-
bined into words that form a sentence express a proposition. A 
facial look signifies pleasure or pain for us. The tapestry of human 
action consists of elementary acts, such as the lifting of an object, 
the swing of a hammer, the cutting of wood with a saw, that indi-
cate the presence of certain purposes. In such elementary under-
standing we do not go back to the overall nexus of life that forms 
the enduring subject of life-manifestations. Nor are we aware of 
any inference from which this nexus might result. 
The fundamental relationship on which the process of elemen-
tary understanding depends is that of an expression to what is 
expressed in it. Elementary understanding is not an inference from 
7 Dilthey comments in the margin: Here material from the Poetics on life-mani-
festation and expression is to be used. (H) See discussions of objectifications and 
expressions at SW 5, 228-29. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
229 
an effect to a cause. Nor must we conceive it more cautiously as a 
208 
procedure that goes back from a given effect to some part of the 
nexus of life that made the effect possible. To be certain, the latter 
relation is implicit in the circumstances themselves, and thus the 
transition from one to the other is, as it were, always at hand-
but it need not take place. 
What is thus interrelated is linked in a distinctive way. The rela-
tionship between manifestations of life and spirit governing all un-
derstanding asserts itself here in its most elementary form, that is, 
understanding tends to focus on the expressed spiritual or mean-
ing content, and yet the sensorially given manifestations or expres-
sions are not submerged in this content. That gesture and fright 
are not juxtaposed, but a unity, is based on the fundamental rela-
tion of expression to spiritual content. To this must be added the 
generic character of all elementary forms of understanding, to 
which we now turn. 
3. OBJECTIVE SPIRIT AND ELEMENTARY UNDERSTANDING 
I have indicated the importance of objective spirit for the possi-
bility of conceptual cognition in the human sciences. By this I 
mean the manifold forms in which a commonality existing among 
individuals has objectified itself in the world of the senses. In this 
objective spirit, the past is a continuously enduring present for us. 
Its scope extends from lifestyles and forms of social intercourse to 
the system of purposes that society has created for itself. It also 
encompasses custom, law, state, religion, art, the sciences, and phi-
losophy. For even the work of a genius will reflect a common 
stock of ideas, attitudes, and ideals characteristic of an age and a 
region. From earliest childhood, the self is nurtured by this world 
of objective spirit. It is also the medium in which the understand-
ing of other persons and their life-manifestations takes place. For 
everything in which spirit has objectified itself contains something 
that is common to the I and the Thou. Every square planted with 
trees, every room in which chairs are arranged, is understandable 
to us from childhood because human tendencies to set goals, pro-
duce order, and define values in common have assigned a place to 
every square and every object in the room. The child grows up 
within the order and ethos of the family that it shares with the 
other members, and in this context it accepts the way the mother 
regulates things. Before the child learns to speak, it is already 
wholly immersed in the medium of commonalities. The child only 
209 
230 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
learns to understand the gestures and facial expressions, move-
ments and exclamations, words and sentences, because it con-
stantly encounters them as the same and in the same relation to 
what they mean and express. Thus the individual becomes ori-
ented in the world of objective spirit. 
This leads to an important result for the process of understand-
ing. Individuals do not usually apprehend manifestations of life in 
isolation, but as filled with a knowledge about commonalities and 
as encompassing a relation to something inner. 
Locating the individual manifestation of life within a common 
context is facilitated by the fact that objective spirit possesses an 
articulated order. It encompasses particular homogeneous systems 
like law or religion, which have a stable and regular structure. 
Thus in civil law, the imperatives enunciated in legal clauses in 
order to secure the highest possible degree of perfection in the 
conduct of human affairs are related to judicial procedures, law 
courts, and other institutions to execute its decisions. Within such 
a context many typical differences emerge. Thus the particular 
manifestations of life that confront the understanding subject can 
be considered as belonging to a sphere of commonality, to a type. 
The commonality sets up a relation between manifestations of life 
and spirit such that as soon as we locate the manifestation in a 
common context, a spiritual meaning attaches to it. A sentence is 
intelligible by virtue of the commonality that exists within a lin-
guistic community about the meaning of words and of forms of 
inflection and about the sense of syntactical structure. The code of 
conduct that has been established in a specific cultural sphere 
makes it possible to choose from a range of greetings and gestures 
to communicate a definite stance toward other persons and to 
have it understood as such. In many countries the crafts have de-
veloped a specific procedure and special instruments for achieving 
an end. This means that when a (craftsman) uses a hammer or 
saw, his purpose is intelligible to us. In this sphere the relation 
between a manifestation of life and human spirit is everywhere 
established by a common order. This illuminates why this relation 
is present in the apprehension of a particular manifestation of life 
and why, without conscious inference based on the relationship of 
2ro 
expression and what is expressed, both parts of the process of 
understanding are fused into a unity. 
If we seek a logical construction for elementary understanding, 
then we find that the link between expression and what is ex-
pressed in the individual instance is inferred from the common-
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
231 
ality of the link. On the basis of this commonality, we can say of 
the manifestation of life that it expresses something about human 
spirit. Here we have an inference from analogy in which a predi-
cate is assigned to a subject with probability on the basis of a 
finite series of cases involved in a common situation. 
Our proposed theory of the difference between elementary and 
higher forms of understanding justifies the traditional distinction 
between pragmatic and historical interpretation by basing the dif-
ference on the relationship within understanding itself between el-
ementary and composite forms. 
4· THE HIGHER FORMS OF UNDERSTANDING 
The transition from elementary to higher forms of understanding 
is already incipient in the former. The greater the inherent distance 
between a given manifestation of life and the one who seeks to 
understand it, the more frequently uncertainties will arise. Then 
an attempt is made to overcome them. A first transition to higher 
forms of understanding occurs when understanding departs from 
the normal connection between an expression and the meaning 
content expressed in it. When the result of understanding presents 
an inner difficulty or something contradictory to what is otherwise 
familiar, we are forced to reconsider. We recall other cases in which 
the normal relation between the manifestation of life and its inner 
content does not exist. Such a divergence already occurs when we 
withdraw our inner states, ideas, or intentions from the view of 
unwanted spectators by means of an impenetrable pose or by si-
lence. Here the mere absence of a visible manifestation is falsely 
interpreted by the observer. But not infrequently we should expect 
that there is also an intention to deceive us. Then facial expres-
sions, gestures, and words contradict the inner state of affairs. 
Thus in various ways, the task arises of considering other mani-
festations of life or of going back to the overall nexus of life in 
order to resolve our doubts. 
Interactions in practical life also establish their own demands on 
our ability to make judgments about the character and capacities 
of particular human beings. We constantly rely on the interpreta-
211 
tions of specific gestures, facial expressions, actions, or combina-
tions of them; they occur in inferences from analogy, but our un-
derstanding pushes us further. Trade and commerce, social life, 
occupation, and family point to the need to gain insight into the 
inner nature of the people around us so that we can make sure 
232 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
how far we can count on them. Here the relation between an ex-
pression and what is expressed goes over into that between the 
multiple manifestations of another person and the inner nexus 
that underlies them. This leads us to also take changing circum-
stances into account. What we have here is an inductive inference 
from particular manifestations of life to the overall nexus of life. It 
presupposes a knowledge of psychic life and its relation to milieu 
and circumstances. Because the series of available manifestations 
of life are limited and because the underlying nexus is indetermi-
nate, only probable results can be expected. If we infer how a life-
unit that we have understood will act in new circumstances, the 
deductive inference from an inductively arrived at insight into a 
psychic nexus can only produce expectations and possibilities. 
When we proceed from a psychic nexus that is itself merely proba-
ble and add new circumstances to consider how it would react to 
them, we can only generate an expectation, not a certainty. As we 
shall soon see, the presupposed knowledge of psychic life is always 
capable of further development; but it will also turn out that it can 
never attain certainty. 
But not all higher forms of understanding are based on the fun-
damental relationship between what has been produced and pro-
ductivity. We already saw that such an assumption is not correct 
for elementary forms of understanding; but a very important por-
tion of the higher forms is also based on the relation between 
expression and what is expressed. In many cases, the understand-
ing of human creations is directed merely at the nexus in which 
the successively apprehended parts of a work form a whole. In-
deed, if understanding is to generate the greatest possible yield for 
our knowledge of the world of human spirit, it is most important 
that this form of understanding should be appreciated in its own 
right. When a play is performed, it is not only the naive spectator 
who is completely absorbed in the plot without thinking of the 
author; even those with literary training can be completely spell-
2r2 
bound by what happens on the stage. Their understanding is di-
rected toward the nexus of the plot, the characters, and the inter-
weaving of those moments that determine the turn of fate. Only 
then will they enjoy the full reality of the extract of life that is 
presented. The process of understanding and re-experiencing will 
then come to fruition as intended by the poet. The whole realm of 
such understanding of human creations is dominated by the rela-
tionship between expressions and the world of human spirit ex-
pressed in them. Only when the spectator notices that what he has 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
233 
just absorbed as a fragment of reality arose as an artistically planned 
creation in the mind of the poet does his understanding, initially 
governed by this relation between a complex of manifestations of 
life and what is expressed in them, pass over into an understand-
ing dominated by the relation between creation and creator. 
The common characteristic of the forms of higher understand-
ing discussed so far is that they take given manifestations and ar-
rive at an understanding of the nexus of a whole through an in-
ductive inference. The basic relationship defining the move from 
external givens to what inheres in them is either, in the first in-
stance, that of expression to what is expressed or, predominantly, 
that of what has been produced to productivity. The procedure is 
based on elementary understanding that makes available, as it 
were, the elements for reconstruction. But higher understanding 
differs from elementary understanding by a further trait, which 
first makes its nature fully visible. 
Understanding always has something individual as its object. In 
its higher forms it proceeds on the basis of an inductive gathering 
of what is given in a work or a life to infer the overall connected-
ness or unity of a work or person- a life-relationship. The anal-
ysis of lived experience and of self-understanding has shown that 
the individual is an intrinsic value in the world of human spirit; 
indeed it is the only intrinsic value that we can establish indubita-
bly. Thus we are concerned with the individual, not merely as an 
example of the human in general but as an individual whole. Inde-
pendently of the practical interest that constantly forces us to take 
other people into account, be they noble or wicked, vulgar or fool-
ish, this concern occupies a considerable place in our lives. The 
mystery of the person lures us for its own sake into ever new and 
deeper attempts at understanding. In such understanding the realm 
of individuals, encompassing human beings and their creations, 
opens up. Here lies the most distinctive contribution of under-
2r3 
standing for the human sciences. Together, objective spirit and the 
productive force of the individual define the world of human spirit. 
History is based on the understanding of both. 
However, we understand individuals by means of their affinities, 
their commonalities. This process presupposes the connection be-
tween the universally human and individuation. On the basis of 
what is universal, we can see individuation extended to the mani-
foldness of human existence, and thereby we constantly solve the 
practical task of living through the advance to individuation from 
within, as it were. The material for solving this task is formed by 
234 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
the particular givens gathered by induction. Each such given has 
an individual character and is apprehended as such; it therefore 
contains a moment that makes it possible to grasp the individual 
articulation of the whole. But the presupposition on which this 
procedure is based assumes ever more developed forms as we be-
come absorbed in the particular and compare it with other partic-
ulars; thus the business of understanding takes us into ever greater 
depths of the world of spirit. Just as objective spirit contains within 
itself an order that is articulated in terms of types, humanity also 
encompasses a kind of ordering system that leads from the regu-
larity and structure of the universally human to the types by which 
understanding grasps individuals. If we assume that individuals 
are not distinguished qualitatively but by means of the relative 
emphasis of particular moments- however one may express this 
psychologically- then this is the inner principle of individuation. 
And if it were possible, in the act of understanding, to activate 
both the external principle of individuation, whereby circum-
stances produce changes in psychic life and its state, and the inner 
principle of individuation, whereby different accentuations of 
structural moments produce variations, then the understanding 
of human beings and of poetic and literary works would be a way 
of gaining access to the greatest mystery of life. In fact, this is the 
case. To acknowledge this we must attend to what cannot be made 
accessible through logical formulas- here only a schematic and 
symbolic explication can be provided. 
5. TRANSPOSITION, RE-CREATING, AND RE-EXPERIENCING 
The position that higher understanding adopts toward its object is 
defined by its task of discovering a vital connectedness in what is 
214 
given. This is only possible if the connectedness that exists in one's 
own lived experience and has been experienced in innumerable 
cases is always available to accompany the possibilities inherent in 
the object. This disposition involved in the task of understanding 
we call "transposition," and this can occur in relation to a human 
being or a work. Then every line of a poem is transformed back 
into life through the inner nexus of the lived experience from 
which the poem arose. Through elementary operations of under-
standing, physically presented words evoke possibilities that lie 
within the psyche. It goes back to some of the accustomed paths in 
which it enjoyed and suffered, desired and acted, in similar situa-
tions. But in the past and in our dreams of the future, innumerable 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
235 
roads are still open; from the words we read there emerge innu-
merable trains of thought. When the poem indicates the external 
situation, it is more likely that the poet's words will evoke the 
appropriate mood. Here too what has been mentioned before is 
the case, namely, that expressions of lived experience may contain 
more than the poet or artist is conscious of and therefore may 
recall more. If the perspective of understanding requires the pres-
ence of the experience of one's own psychic nexus, this can also be 
described as the transfer of one's self into a given complex of man-
ifestations of life. 
On the basis of this transfer or transposition there arises the 
highest form of understanding in which the totality of psychic life 
is active- re-creating or re-experiencing. Understanding as such is 
an operation running inverse to the course of production. But a 
fully sympathetic reliving requires that understanding go forward 
with the line of the events themselves. It must advance continually 
with the course of life itself. Thus the process of transposing one-
self or transposition expands to make re-experiencing a creation 
along the line of the events. This allows us to move forward with 
contemporary history, with an occurrence in a distant land, or 
with something going on in the psyche of someone close to us. Re-
experiencing attains its fulfillment when an event has been pro-
cessed by the consciousness of a poet, artist, or historian and lies 
before us in a fixed and permanent work. 
A lyrical poem makes possible, through the sequence of its verses, 
the re-experiencing of a nexus of lived experience- not the real 
one that stimulated the poet, but the one that, on its basis, the 
poet places in the mouth of an ideal person. The sequence of scenes 
in a play allows us to re-experience fragments from the life-course 
215 
of the portrayed persons. The tale of the novelist or the narrative 
of the historian that follows the historical course of events pro-
duces an act of re-experiencing in us. The triumph of re-experienc-
ing is that it completes the fragments of a course of events in such 
a way that we believe them to possess a continuity. 
What, then, is involved in such re-experiencing? Here we are 
only interested in what the process achieves; we will not give a 
psychological explanation of it. Thus we will not discuss the rela-
tionship of this concept to those of sympathy and empathy, though 
their connectedness is clear insofar as sympathy strengthens the 
energy of re-experiencing. We will focus on the significance of re-
experiencing for our appropriation of the world of human spirit. 
It displays two modes: [I] every lively presentification of a milieu 
236 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
and external situation stimulates a re-experiencing in us, and [2] 
the imagination can increase or diminish the intensity of the atti-
tudes, powers, feelings, strivings, and thought-tendencies that 
characterize our own life-nexus in order to re-create the psychic 
life of any other person. When the curtain goes up and Richard 
appears, sensitive spectators attending to his words, facial expres-
sions, and movements ean re-experience something that lies out-
side any possibility in their real life. The fantastic forest in As You 
Like It transposes us into a mood that allows us to re-create all its 
eccentricities. 
Such re-experiencing plays a significant part in the acquisition 
of the cultural achievements that we owe to the historian and the 
poet. Each person's life-course becomes increasingly determined in 
ways that limit its inherent possibilities. The shaping of character 
determines all further development. In short, each person, whether 
he considers the fixed limits of his situation or the form of his 
acquired life-nexus, finds that the range of new perspectives on life 
and of inner transformations of personal existence is restricted. 
But understanding opens up a wide realm of possibilities that are 
not available within the limitations of a person's real life. The pos-
sibility of experiencing religious states in my own life is narrowly 
delimited for me, as for most of my contemporaries. But when I 
survey the letters and writings of Luther, the reports of his con-
temporaries, the records of religious disputes and councils, and 
those of his dealings with officials, I experience a religious process 
of an eruptive power and intensity commensurate with issues of 
216 
life and death, which is beyond the possibility of direct experience 
for a present-day human being. But I can re-experience it. I trans-
pose myself into circumstances in which everything supports such 
an extraordinary development of religious emotional life. 
In monasteries I see a technique of communicating with the in-
visible world that gives monks a constant orientation toward tran-
scendent matters; theological controversies here become questions 
of inner life. I note how what is thus created in the monasteries 
is spread through innumerable channels- sermons, confessions, 
teachings, and writings- to the laity; and then I note how councils 
and religious movements have spread the doctrine of the invisible 
church and universal priesthood everywhere and how it comes to 
be related to the liberation of personality in secular life. Conse-
quently, what has been achieved by intense struggles in lonely cells 
asserts itself despite the church's opposition. Christianity as a pro-
ductive force for shaping life even in its family, professional, and 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
237 
political relations has become a power that accommodates the 
spirit of the age in large cities and wherever culture flourishes, as 
in the Nuremberg of Hans Sachs
8 or Diirer.
9 As Luther strides at 
the head of this movement, we can experience his development on 
the basis of a connectedness that proceeds from the universally 
human through the religious sphere to its historical setting and, 
finally, his individuality. Thus this process opens up for us a reli-
gious world both in him and in his companions of the early stages 
of the Reformation, which serves to widen our horizon of the pos-
sibilities of human existence. Only in this way do these possi-
bilities become accessible to us. Thus human beings who are deter-
mined from within can experience many other kinds of existence 
through the imagination. Confined by circumstances, they can 
nevertheless glimpse exotic beauties of the world and regions of 
life beyond their reach. Put generally: Human beings bound and 
limited by the reality of life are liberated not only by art- as has 
often been claimed- but also by the understanding of the histori-
cal. This effect of history, which its most recent detractors have 
not noticed, is widened and deepened at more advanced levels of 
historical consciousness. 
6. EXEGESIS OR INTERPRETATION 
Re-creating and re-experiencing what is foreign and from the past 
shows clearly how understanding is based on a special, personal 
kind of genius. But because understanding is a significant and per-
manent task that grounds the science of history, personal genius 
217 
becomes a technique that emerges with the development of histori-
cal consciousness. It requires that permanently fixed manifesta-
tions of life be available so that understanding can always return 
to them. The rule-guided understanding of permanently fixed 
manifestations of life we call "exegesis" or "interpretation." Since 
it is only in language that the life of mind and spirit finds its com-
plete and exhaustive expression- one that makes objective com-
prehension possible- exegesis culminates in the interpretation of 
~Hans Sachs (1494-1576), German poet, shoemaker by trade; composed over 
six thousand narratives, songs, fables, and allegories; a supporter of Luther, he 
wrote the verse allegory Die Wittembergische Nachtigalle to further the Reforma-
tion; leader of the Meistersingers in Nuremberg. 
"Albrecht Durer (1471-1528), German Renaissance painter and engraver, also 
active in Nuremberg. 
23 8 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
the written records of human existence. This art is the basis of 
philology. The science of this art is hermeneutics. 
The interpretation of surviving remnants is intimately and nec-
essarily connected with criticism. This results from difficulties pre-
sented by exegesis and leads to the purification of texts and the 
rejection of documents, works, and traditions. Interpretation and 
criticism have developed ever new means over the course of his-
tory, just as science has constantly refined its experiments. The 
transmission of these means from one generation of philologists 
and historians to another rests predominantly on personal contact 
with the great virtuosi and the tradition of their achievements. 
Nothing in the sphere of the sciences appears so personally condi-
tioned and based on personal contact as this philological art. Its 
codification in terms of hermeneutical rules was characteristic of a 
stage in history when attempts were made to introduce rules in all 
areas; this hermeneutical codification corresponded to theories of 
artistic creation that considered it as a production according to 
rules. In the great period when historical consciousness dawned in 
Germany, Friedrich Schlegel, Schleiermacher, and Boeckh replaced 
this hermeneutical codification with an idealistic theory that based 
a new, deeper kind of understanding on a conception of spiritual 
creation; Fichte had made this possible, and Schlegel intended to 
establish it in his projected science of critique. This new intuitive 
insight into creation provided the basis for Schleiermacher's bold 
assertion that one should understand an author better than he un-
derstood himself. There is a truth embedded in this paradox that 
can be grounded psychologically. 
Today hermeneutics enters a context that assigns the human sci-
ences a new, important task. It has always defended the reliability 
218 
of understanding against historical skepticism and subjective arbi-
trariness: first when it attacked allegorical exegesis, then when it 
justified the great Protestant doctrine of the intelligibility of the 
biblical texts by themselves against the skepticism of the Council 
of Trent, and then again when it provided the theoretical founda-
tions for the confidence of Schlegel, Schleiermacher, and Boeckh in 
the progress of the philological and historical sciences over against 
all doubts. Now hermeneutics must define its task relative to the 
epistemological task of demonstrating that it is possible to know 
the nexus of the historical world and to find the means for bring-
ing it about. The fundamental meaning of understanding has been 
clarified, and now we must determine the attainable degree of uni-
versal validity in understanding from its logical forms upwards. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
239 
We found the point of departure for establishing how much the 
assertions of the human sciences correspond to reality in the na-
ture of experiencing, which is a reflexive awareness of reality. 
When experiencing is raised to attentive consciousness in ele-
mentary operations of thought, they merely note relationships 
contained in lived experience. Discursive thought re-presents what 
inheres in experiencing. Understanding rests primarily on the rela-
tion, inherent in every lived experience that can be characterized 
as understanding, of an expression to what is expressed in it. This 
relation can be experienced in its distinctiveness. And because we 
can only overstep the narrow sphere of experiencing by interpret-
ing manifestations of life, understanding assumes a central role in 
the formation of the human sciences. But it has also become evi-
dent that understanding cannot be conceived simply as a logical 
operation; transposition, re-creation, and re-experiencing point to 
the overall nature of psychic life at work in the process of under-
standing. In this respect it is connected with experiencing itself, 
which, after all, is merely a reflexive awareness of the whole psy-
chic reality in a given situation. There is something irrational in all 
understanding, just as life itself is irrational; it cannot be re-
presented in a logical formula. The ultimate, although quite sub-
jective, sureness residing in this re-experiencing cannot be replaced 
by any cognitively tested inferences that explicate the process of 
understanding. These are the limits placed on the logical treatment 
of understanding by its very nature. 
We note that the laws and forms of logic are clearly valid in 
every part of science, and that its methods manifest extensive af-
219 
finities in accordance with the cognitive stance toward reality. But 
understanding introduces procedures that have no analogy in the 
methods of the natural sciences. These procedures of understand-
ing are based on the relation between manifestations of life and 
something inner expressed in them. 
From the thought procedure involved in understanding we must 
distinguish the preliminary grammatical and historical work that 
merely serves to place us over against some fixed product of the 
past or of a distant origin, or using a foreign language in the posi-
tion of a reader from the author's own time and environment. 
In the elementary forms of understanding, we infer from a num-
ber of cases in which a series of similar manifestations express a 
meaning with a corresponding affinity that the same relation will 
hold in other similar cases. From the recurrence of the same mean-
ing of a word, a gesture, a public act, we infer this meaning in a 
240 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
new instance. One notes immediately, however, how little this in-
ference schema achieves by itself. In reality, as we have seen, mani-
festations of life are at the same time re-presentations of some-
thing universal; we draw an inference when we can classify them 
as a type of gesture or act or as part of a sphere of usage. The 
inference from particular to particular contains a reference to 
something common, which is re-presented in every case. This rela-
tionship becomes even clearer when, instead of inferring a new 
instance from the relationship between a series of particular, simi-
lar manifestations and the psychic life whose expression it is, ever 
more complex individual states of affairs become the object of an 
inference by analogy. Thus from the regular connection between 
definite properties in a complex character we infer that with the 
existence of this combination in a new instance, an as yet unob-
served trait will not be lacking. On the basis of the same kind of 
inference, we assign a mystical writing that has been newly discov-
ered, or needs to be chronologically reclassified, to a particular 
sphere of mysticism at a particular time. With this kind of infer-
ence there is the tendency to derive the way the particular parts 
are connected in such a structure from individual cases and thus to 
ground new instances more thoroughly. Thus in fact the inference 
by analogy goes over into an inductive inference that can be ap-
plied to a new instance. The distinction between these two forms 
220 
of inference has only a relative validity in the process of under-
standing. As a result, we are only justified in a somewhat limited 
degree of expectation about a new case- a degree about which no 
universal rule can be given, but only an assessment based on vary-
ing circumstances. It is the task of a logic of the human sciences to 
find the rules for such an assessment. 10 
The process of understanding based on this is to be conceived as 
inductive. This induction is of the kind in which an incomplete 
series of cases is used not to infer a universal law but a structure 
or ordering system that gathers the cases as parts of a whole. The 
natural sciences and the human sciences share this type of induc-
tion. Kepler discovered the elliptical orbit of the planet Mars by 
such an induction. And just as he inferred a simple mathematical 
regularity from observations and calculations by means of a geo-
metrical intuition, so all efforts to attain understanding or intel-
ligibility must try to gather words into a sense and the sense of the 
parts of a whole into the structure of the latter. What is given here 
10 There seems to be a gap in the manuscript here. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
is a sequence of words. Each of these words is determinate-inde-
terminate. It encompasses a range of meanings. The means of syn-
tactically relating these words to each other are, also, ambiguous, 
within fixed limits; sense emerges when the indeterminate is deter-
mined by a construction. In the same way, the compositional value 
of a whole made up of sentences is ambiguous within limits and 
must be defined on the basis of the whole. This process of deter-
mining determinate-indeterminate particulars ... 
Addenda 
I. MUSICAL UNDERSTANDING 
In lived experience we grasp the self neither in the form of its full 
course nor in the depths of what it encompasses. For the scope of 
conscious life rises like a small island from inaccessible depths. But 
an expression can tap these very depths. It is creative. Thus in 
understanding, life itself can become accessible through the re-
creation of creation. To be sure, we have merely a work before us, 
one that in order to endure must be fixed in some part of space, 
whether in notes, in letters, in a phonogram, or originally in a 
remembrance. What is fixed in this way is an ideal explication of a 
process, of a musical or poetic nexus of lived experience. And 
22r 
what do we observe here? Parts of a whole that develop and move 
forward in time. In each part there is operative what we call a 
tendency. Tone follows upon tone and aligns itself with it accord-
ing to the laws of our tonal system. This system leaves open infi-
nite possibilities, but in the direction of one of these possibilities, 
tones proceed in such a way that earlier ones are conditioned by 
subsequent ones. The ascending parts of a melody may be syn-
chronous and an earlier part may condition those that follow. But 
the final melody of an ascending progression of notes in a work by 
Handel at the same time grounds the first of them. Similarly, a 
descending line strives for resolution: it is conditioned by this end-
point and yet it also conditions it. Everywhere free possibility. No-
where in this conditioning is there necessity. There is something 
like a mutual consent between figures that attract and then repel 
each other. It would be presumptuous to think that we could in 
any way know why a second phrase follows upon the first, just in 
the way it does with such a new harmonic nuance or is trans-
formed in such a variation or embellished with this figure. There is 
242 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
a having-to-be-thus in this sequence- it involves not necessity but 
rather the actualization of an aesthetic value. We should not think 
that what follows at a certain point could not have gone differ-
ently. We see here a tendency inherent in creation toward what 
reflection calls the beautiful or sublime. 
Let us look further. [Musical] understanding depends on being 
able to retain in memory what has just passed so that it can enter 
into the intuition of what follows. 
The object of the historical study of music is not some mental or 
psychic process behind the composition, but something objective, 
namely, the tonal nexus that appears in the imagination as expres-
sion. Its task is to find through comparison- for it is a compara-
tive discipline- the tonal means for individual musical effects. 
But there is a wider sense in which music too is the expression 
of lived experience. Here "lived experience" designates every kind 
of linking of specific experiences in the present and in memory; 
analogously, "expression" designates an imaginative process in 
which lived experience illuminates the historically evolved world 
of tones, in which all the ways of being expressive have been con-
nected in the historical continuity of the tradition. There is, then, 
no rhythmical form or melody in this imaginative creation that 
does not speak of what has been experienced, and yet everything 
is more than expression. For this musical world with its infinite 
222 
possibilities of tonal beauties-and of meaning is. always there, al-
ways advancing in history, capable of endless development. And it 
is in this world that the musician lives, not in his feelings. 
No musical history could say anything about the way in which 
lived experience becomes music. The highest achievement of music 
is that what proceeds dimly, indeterminately, in a musical soul, 
and often imperceptibly to itself, unintentionally finds a crystal-
clear expression in a musical form. There is no duality of lived 
experience and music, no double world, no carryover from the 
one to the other. Genius is simply living in the tonal sphere as if 
it alone existed; all fate and suffering is forgotten in this tonal 
world, but in such a way that they are all still there. Also there is 
no determinate path from lived experience to music. The com-
poser living in his music- whether through memories, fluttering 
images, or dissipated indeterminate moods that permeate the very 
delights of his creative process- may take as his point of depar-
ture either a rhythmic invention or a harmonic sequence or then 
again a lived experience. Of all the arts, music is most strictly 
bound by technical rules and the most free in mental movement. 
In this back and forth we can locate everything creative and at 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
243 
the same time the never fully penetrable mystery how tonal se-
quences and rhythms mean something other than what they are 
themselves. This is not a psychological relationship between men-
tal states and their representation in the imagination. Those who 
look for that seek a will-o'-the-wisp. Rather, it is a relationship of 
an objective musical work and its parts as an imaginative creation 
to what it means in terms of its every melodic line; that is, what it 
says to the listener about a mental complex consisting of relations 
between rhythm, melody, and harmonic progression and the im-
pression of something mental that speaks through all this. Not 
psychological, but musical relationships form the object of the 
study of musical genius, works, and theory. The artist can proceed 
in innumerable ways, but the relation between a musical work and 
what it expresses to the listener and says to him is determinate, 
graspable, and representable. We speak of the interpretation of a 
musical work given by a conductor or performing artist, but every 
relationship to a musical work is interpretive and deals with some-
thing objective. What is psychologically operative in the artist can 
proceed from music to lived experience or from it to music or 
both in alternating fashion, and what has its basis in the psyche 
need not be, indeed usually is not, experienceable by the artist as 
such. It moves imperceptibly in the obscurity of the psyche, and 
223 
the dynamic relationship that existed in these depths is first ex-
pressed in the work. It is only from the work that we can discern 
it. That is the very value of music: It expresses and makes objec-
tive for us the mental life of the artist. This complex assemblage of 
quality, temporal sequence, dynamic form, and content is analyzed 
in the musical work and brought to distinct consciousness as a 
relationship of rhythm, tonal progression, and harmony- a rela-
tionship of tonal beauty and expression. 
What is primary is the tonal world with its possibilities of ex-
pression and beauty as developed in the history of music. This is 
appropriated by musicians from childhood on and is always there 
for them. Everything they confront is transformed into this tonal 
world and rises from the depths of the psyche in order to express 
what was there. Fate, suffering, and happiness exist for composers 
above all in their melodies. Here memory again asserts its power 
in producing meaning. The difficulties of life are too strong to 
allow the imagination a free rein. But the resonance of the past 
and our reveries about it provide the airy material, removed from 
earthly gravity, from which the light shapes of music are composed. 
There are aspects of life that can be expressed as rhythm, mel-
ody, and harmony, as forms of flow and of the rise and fall of a 
244 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
mood; what is uninterrupted and constant, the profundity of psy-
chic life that comes to rest in harmony. 
The available foundations of musical history should be supple-
mented by a theory of musical meaning. Such a theory is the inter-
mediary that connects the other theoretical parts of musicology 
with creation and further backwards with the life of the artist and 
the development of musical schools. A theory of musical meaning 
is such an intermediary relational system and the entry point into 
the real mysteries of the musical imagination. 
Let me give some examples. In the finale of the fii"st act of Don 
Giovanni, we hear rhythms not only of a different tempo but also 
of a different measure. This has the effect that very disparate as-
pects of human life such as delight in dance [and anger] seem to be 
combined, so that the manifold nature of the world can be ex-
pressed. This is the very effect of music that relies on the possi-
bility of allowing various simultaneously coexisting persons or 
musical subjects such as choruses, etc. to affect us, whereas poetry 
is restricted to dialogue, etc. This is the basis for the so-called 
224 
metaphysical nature of music. Or consider an aria of Handel in 
which a tonal sequence that is simple in all respects is repeated in 
an ascending order. Thus a surveyable whole arises in memory; 
this kind of crescendo becomes an expression of productive force. 
In the final analysis, it depends on the capacity of memory to sur-
vey a temporal sequence due to its simplicity. Or consider a cho-
rale that was developed on the basis of a folk song. The simple 
song pattern that expresses the course of a feeling very clearly 
comes to stand under new conditions. The slow, steady progres-
sion of tones and the harmonic sequence that is carried by the bass 
notes of the organ now allow for the emergence of a relation to a 
sublime object that rises above the fluctuation of feeling in its very 
midst. What is made expressible in this way is something like reli-
gious communion, the relation to the supersensible- from within 
time, the relation of the finite to the infinite. Or consider the con-
versation of the trembling soul with its savior in a Bach cantata. 
On the one hand, restless, rapid, high-pitched notes, leaping across 
considerable intervals into the coloratura range, signify a psychic 
type; on the other hand, a slow progression of low and restful 
notes, the majority of which fall within a small range, together 
with schemata of a soothing tonality, signifies the redeemer type. 
No one can doubt such meanings.
11 
11 Several unintelligible words follow. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
245 
Musical meaning develops in two opposed directions. On the 
one hand, as expressing a poetic series of words with a determi-
nate object, musical meaning goes in the direction of an inter-
pretation of something that has been objectively established by 
conditions. [On the other hand,] instrumental music has no deter-
minate object, but one that is infinite, i.e., indeterminate. Such an 
object is provided only by life itself. Thus in its highest forms, 
instrumental music has life itself as its object. A musical genius 
such as Bach is inspired by each sound in nature, by each gesture, 
even by indeterminate noises, to create corresponding musical 
forms- moving themes, as it were, that have the attribute of speak-
ing about life in general terms. Here we see that program music is 
the death of true instrumental music. 
2. LIVED EXPERIENCE AND UNDERSTANDING
12 
It follows from this account that various kinds of comprehen-
sion- explication, reproduction, and representation through dis-
cursive functions- combine to form a method aimed at grasping 
and exhausting lived experience. Since lived experience is unfath-
omable and no thought can go behind it, since cognition itself 
225 
only comes about in relation to it, since consciousness of lived 
experience must constantly probe it, the task of comprehending 
lived experience is infinite, not just in the sense that it demands 
ever more scientific accomplishment but in the sense that it is in-
soluble by its very nature. Then understanding comes into the pic-
ture. It has an equally original task even though methodically it 
must presuppose lived experience. Lived experience and under-
standing constitute two aspects of the logical process that re-
enforce each other. 
3. METHODS OF UNDERSTANDING 
To a human being caught up in daily life, the past seems at first 
the more foreign and indifferent the more distant it is. Its remains 
lie there as something whose connection to us has been broken. 
Here the procedure of understanding that the researcher has con-
stantly practiced in life itself claims its place. 
r. Description of this procedure. We experience ourselves, but 
we do not understand ourselves. Everything about ourselves is 
12 We have kept this section where Bernard Groethuysen, the editor of GS VII, 
placed it, but it fits more appropriately at the end of page I 5 I above. 
246 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
self-evident; however, we have no external standard by which to 
measure ourselves. Only what we measure by the measure of our-
selves obtains determinate dimensions and boundaries. Can the 
self measure itself by others? And how do we understand that 
which is unfamiliar or alien? 
The more gifted someone is, the more possibilities there are in 
him. They have asserted themselves in the course of his life and 
are still present in his memory. The longer a life lasts, the more 
encompassing these remembered possibilities. Thus we speak of 
the all-encompassing understanding of old age and the genius of 
understanding. 
2. [There is a] form of understanding [that applies] induction to 
partially determined details to infer a connection that determines a 
whole. 
4.
13 THE LIMITS OF UNDERSTANDING 
The limits of understanding lie also in the modes of givenness. A 
literary work forms an inner nexus; although this nexus is not 
itself temporal, we can only apprehend it in the sequential process 
of reading or hearing it in time. When I read a drama, it is as with 
227 
life itself. As I move forward, the past loses its clarity and deter-
minacy: scenes become obscured. My main thesis is that only 
when I cling to the nexus do I attain a unified overview of the 
scenes, but this gives me merely a skeleton. I can approximate an 
intuition of the whole by incorporating it in my memory so that 
all the moments of the nexus are included. Understanding thus 
becomes an intellectual process demanding the greatest effort, one 
that can never be fully realized. 
When life has passed by, nothing remains but the memory of it; 
this memory is also linked to the continued life of individuals and 
is accordingly fleeting .... 
14 
The comprehension of these remnants of the past everywhere 
13 In GS VII, this is section 5 and follows section 4 from GS VII 225-26, entitled 
"Hermeneutics." Research has shown, however, that the original section 4 should 
not have been added by Groethuysen, the editor. It is merely a series of notes 
Dilthey excerpted from Schleiermacher and therefore has been omitted in this edi-
tion. See "Ein Schleiermacher-Exzerpt in Diltheys Fragmenten zum Aufbau" in Dil-
they-]ahrbuch fiir Philosophie und Geschichte der Geisteswissenschaften, ed. Frit-
jof Rodi, vol. 12 (1999-2000) (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2ooo), pp. 
271-72. 
14 Several unreadable lines follow. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
247 
involves understanding. Only the modes of understanding differ. 
Common to all modes of understanding is the move beyond the 
apprehension of indeterminate-determinate parts to attempt to 
grasp the sense of the whole, and from this in turn to seek to more 
firmly determine the parts. Its failure occurs when individual parts 
resist being understood in this way. And this requires a new deter-
mination of the sense, which also does justice to these parts. And 
this effort goes on until all the sense inherent in the manifestations 
of life is exhausted. What is most distinctive of understanding is 
that it does not operate with something univocally determinable as 
in our cognition of nature, such as the representational image that 
is regarded as fundamental [to] external reality. The representation 
is basic for our cognition of nature as a fixed magnitude that ap-
pears in intuition. The object is constructed from representations as 
something persistent that can explain the changes of representations. 
The operations of understanding are essentially relational in that 
the external refers to the internal, the whole to the parts. We have 
here something determinate-indeterminate, an attempt at determi-
nation, a process that will never come to an end, an interchange 
between part and whole. 
228 
III. The Categories of Life 
LIFE 
Let us consider the human world. It is also the proper sphere of 
poets and writers. The events they portray happen there. The char-
acteristics by which they lend significance to events are taken from 
this human world. How poets are able to superimpose a new real-
ity over life that can disturb us, expand, and uplift our soul like 
life itself is a great mystery that can be solved only if the relations 
of this human world and its basic features to literature are made 
clear. Only then can we develop a theory that will convert the 
history of literature into a historical science. 
Life is the nexus of interactions between persons as conditioned 
by the external world but considered independently of changes in 
time and place. In the human sciences, I confine the term "life" to 
the human world. Its meaning is defined here by the domain in 
which it is used and is not subject to misunderstanding. Life con-
sists in the interactions of life-units. The psychophysical life-
course, which from our perspective begins and ends in time, con-
stitutes something that has an identity for the outside observer 
because of the selfsameness of the body in which the process takes 
place. At the same time, however, this life-course is characterized 
by the noteworthy state of affairs that each of its parts is con-
nected in consciousness with other parts of a lived experience that 
is marked by the continuity, connectedness, and selfsameness of 
what elapses. Likewise the expression "interaction" in the human 
sciences does not signify the kind of relationship that thought as-
certains in nature, which would make it an aspect of causality; the 
causality we can detect in nature always implies causa aequat ef-
fectum [cause equals effect]; instead, interaction designates a lived 
experience that can be expressed in terms of the relationship of 
impulse and resistance, pressure, the awareness of being furthered, 
joy about other persons, etc. Of course, impulse here does not 
signify a spontaneous force or causality as postulated by some ex-
planative psychological theories. It merely designates a state of af-
fairs capable of being experienced, which is in some way rooted in 
229 
the life-unit. Impulse is the lived experience of the intention to 
execute movements directed at an external effect. This is how lived 
experiences that are generally expressed as interactions among dif-
ferent persons emerge. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
249 
Life is the nexus in which these interactions occur as condi-
tioned by the system of natural objects according to the law of 
causality, which also encompasses that aspect of the psychic pro-
cess that relates to bodies. This kind of life is always and every-
where spatially and temporally determined -localized, so to speak, 
in the spatiotemporal affairs of life-units. However, if we focus on 
what occurs everywhere and always in the sphere of the human 
world, and as such makes possible spatially and temporally deter-
mined events- not by abstracting from the latter but in an intu-
ition that leads from this whole with those traits that are always 
and everywhere the same to those that are differentiated in space 
and time- then a concept of life emerges that contains the foun-
dation for all its individual forms and systems available for us to 
experience, understand, express, and compare. 
Then and only then does a general trait of life begin to fill us 
with wonder- we only experience this in the human world, not in 
nature, not even in the natural objects that we designate as being 
alive or as organic forms of life. 
LIVED EXPERIENCE 
Life is intimately related to temporal fulfillment. Its whole charac-
ter, both its inherent corruptibility and its capacity to form a nexus 
in which it has a unity or self, is determined by time. 
Life exists in time in the relationship of parts to a whole, that is, 
as their nexus or connectedness. 
That which is re-experienced in understanding is given in the 
same connectedness. 
Life and what is re-experienced manifest a special relationship of 
parts to a whole, which is that of the meaning of parts for the whole. 
We see this most clearly in memory. In every life-concern in which 
our total being adopts a posture to itself or to others, we see again 
and again that parts have a significance for the whole. I look at a 
landscape and apprehend it. We should not assume that this is 
merely a relation of apprehension rather than a life-concern. Ac-
cordingly, we may not label the momentary lived experience that 
230 
directly refers to the landscape an "image." I prefer the term "im-
pression." Basically nothing but impressions are given to me. 
[There is] no self distinct from them nor something that they are 
the impression of. The latter I only add through a constructive act. 
250 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
AN OBSERVATION 
I would like to insist that meaning be linked with the totality of 
the apprehending subject. I could make the term "meaning" so 
universal that it applies to every relation between parts and 
wholes that is presented to the subject, so that the object of 
the thought process, or rather the relation of parts in objective 
thought and in purposive action, is also included and therefore 
even the general representation that construes particular images. 
But then meaning betokens nothing more than belonging to a 
whole, and the mystery of life how a whole can possess an organic 
or psychic reality is simply eliminated, etc. 
2 
Viewed psychologically, the present is a passage of time whose 
extension we comprehend as a unity. We include in the present 
whatever becomes indistinguishable in its continuum. The present 
is a moment of life of which we are able to have a lived experi-
ence. But we also call what is structurally connected in memory a 
lived experience, even if the experiencing took place at different 
times. 
The principle of lived experience is that everything that is there 
for us is so only as a given in the present. Even when a lived 
experience is past, it is only there for us as given in a present 
experience. The principle of consciousness is more general (and 
more inclusive), for it also encompasses the nonreal. 
The next attribute of lived experience is its qualitative being- it 
has a reality that cannot be defined by reflexive awareness, for it 
also extends into what is not possessed distinctly (can one say 
"possessed" here?). The lived experience of something external, of 
the outer world, is there for me in a manner similar to what is not 
apprehended but can only be inferred. (I maintain that my lived 
experience also includes what is not distinct and needs to be 
explicated.) 
It is a fact that a part of what is encompassed in my intuition (in 
the broadest sense of the word) can be brought into focus and 
23 r 
apperceived through its significance. This can then be distin-
guished from those mental processes that have not been apper-
ceived. This is what we call the self, and there exists the double 
relation of what I am and what I have. 
The next thing to demonstrate is that lived experience also en-
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
compasses a real structural nexus of life, which is localized spa-
tiotemporally and extends outward from the present, etc.; this 
contains a [further] structural nexus according to which an inher-
ent purposiveness exerts a continued efficacy. 
When we remember lived experiences, we can distinguish the 
manner in which they continue to have a (dynamic) efficacy in the 
present from lived experiences that are completely past. In the first 
case, feeling as such re-emerges; in the other, we have representa-
tions of feelings, etc. Only on the basis of the present can there be 
a feeling about these representations of feelings. 
Living through an experience 15 and lived experience 16 are not 
distinct from each other; they are two ways of expressing the same 
thing. 
From lived experience we then distinguish judgments that are 
given in apperception: I am sad, I witness a death, or I am notified 
about one. This brings with it the double direction of statements 
that express a given reality. 
DURATION APPREHENDED IN UNDERSTANDING 
In introspection that is directed at our own experiencing, we can-
not apprehend the forward movement of the psychic process, for 
every act of fixation arrests that on which it focuses and gives it a 
certain duration. But here also the relationship of experiencing, 
expression, and understanding makes possible a solution. We grasp 
the expression of an action and we re-experience it. 
The advance of time leaves ever more of the past behind and 
pushes forward into the future. The great problem, whether a psy-
chic process is a mere passive occurrence of something ... or an 
activity is solved when we see the process being expressed in such 
a way that a directedness comes to expression in what is appre-
hended. Even advancing in time and the psychic accumulation of 
the past do not suffice. I must seek out an expression that can 
occur in time and is not distorted from without. Instrumental mu-
sic is one such expression. However it may have originated, it pre-
sents a sequence in which the creator can survey its temporal 
nexus from one formation to another. Here we see a tendency that 
is directed, an action reaching out for fulfillment, an advance of 
psychic activity itself, a being conditioned by the past and yet the 
232 
1; Erleben. 
1" Erlebnis. 
252 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
containment of various possibilities, an explication that is at the 
same time creative. 
MEANING 
A new trait of life becomes visible that is temporally conditioned 
but is something new that surpasses time. Life is understood in its 
own essence through categories that are alien to the cognition of 
the natural world. Here again it is decisive that these categories 
are not applied to life a priori as from the outside, but that they lie 
in the very nature of life. The attitude that gains abstract expres-
sion in them provides the sole point of access to the understanding 
of life. For life itself exists only in such determinate ways of relat-
ing a whole to its parts. And if we focus on these relations ab-
stractly, as categories, then it is part of this very method that the 
number of such categories cannot be delimited and that their rela-
tionship cannot be reduced to a logical form. Meaning, value, pur-
pose, development, and ideal are categories of this kind. Because 
the connectedness of the course of life can only be apprehended 
through the category of the meaning of the individual parts of life 
in relation to an understanding of the whole, and because every 
facet of human life can only be understood in the same way, all 
other categories depend on it. Meaning is the all-inclusive category 
in which life can be apprehended. 
Mutability belongs just as much to the objects we construct in 
cognizing the natural world as to life, which has a reflexive aware-
ness of itself in its determinations. Only in life, however, does the 
present encompass the representation of the past in memory and 
the representation of the future through the imaginative considera-
tion of its possibilities and through activity that frames purposes 
for itself in light of these possibilities. Thus the present is filled 
with the past and carries the future within itself. This is the sense 
of the word "development" in the human sciences. It does not 
mean that we can apply to the life of the individual, the nation, or 
humanity the concept of a purpose to be realized; this would 
be a way of looking at the object from the outside and could just 
as well be rejected. This concept of development merely designates 
a relationship that inheres in life. With this concept of develop-
ment we are simultaneously given the concept of something taking 
shape. Taking shape is a general property of life. If we look more 
deeply into life, we find something taking shape even in the most 
impoverished souls. We see it most clearly in great men who have 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
253 
a historical destiny; but no life is so meager that its course lacks 
233 
all shape. Wherever structure and the acquired psychic nexus 
based on it produce a constancy of life in which change and tran-
sitoriness can appear, there a temporary life-course becomes a 
mode of shaping. But this concept of something taking shape can 
only come about when we apprehend life in terms of the category 
of meaning. 
The category of meaning designates the relationship of parts of 
life to the whole as rooted in the nature of life. We only possess 
this connectedness through memory by which we can survey a life 
span that has elapsed. Thus meaning establishes itself as the form 
of life-comprehension. We grasp the meaning of a moment of the 
past. It is meaningful insofar as an act or some external event 
committing us to the future took place; or insofar as a plan to 
guide us into the future was adopted; or insofar as such a plan 
was carried out. Or it is meaningful for communal life insofar as 
an individual's engagement with it at the same time allows his 
distinctive being to contribute to the shaping of humanity. In all of 
these and other cases, the individual moment has meaning through 
its connection with the whole, through the relation of past and 
future, of individual existence and humanity. But what is the dis-
tinctive nature of this relation of part to whole within life? 
It is a relation that is never completely consummated. For that 
one would have to wait until life runs its course, and only in the 
hour of death could one survey the whole to ascertain the relation 
between whole and parts. Similarly, one would have to wait for 
the end of history to possess material sufficiently complete to de-
termine its meaning. On the other hand, the whole is only there 
for us insofar as we can understand it from the parts. Understand-
ing always hovers between these two modes of consideration. Our 
comprehension of the meaning of life is continually changing. 
Every life-plan expresses a certain take on the meaning of life. 
What we set as our future goal conditions how we determine the 
meaning of the past, and any realized shape of life receives its 
measure from the way we assess the meaning of what is remem-
bered. Just as words have a meaning by which they designate 
something, and sentences have a sense that we construe, so we can 
construe the connectedness of life from the determinate-indetermi-
nate meaning of its parts. 
Meaning is the special relation that the parts have to the whole 
234 
within life. We recognize this meaning, as we do that of the words 
in a sentence, by virtue of memories and future possibilities. The 
254 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
essence of meaning relations lies in the shaping of a life-course 
over time on the basis of life-structure as conditioned by a milieu. 
And what is it in the contemplation of one's own life-course 
that constitutes the connectedness of individual parts into a whole 
and makes life intelligible? A lived experience is a unit whose parts 
are connected by a common meaning. The storyteller exerts his 
influence by highlighting the meaningful moments of a life-course. 
The historian designates human beings as meaningful or impor-
tant17 and turning points in their lives as significant;18 he recognizes 
the meaning19 of a work or of an individual by its determinate 
effect on human destiny in general. The parts of a life-course have 
a determinate meaning for the whole. In a word, the category of 
meaning obviously retains an especially close connection to under-
standing. We must now seek to grasp this connection. 
Every manifestation of life has a meaning to the extent that, as a 
sign, it expresses something, and as an expression, it refers to some-
thing that pertains to life. Life itself does not mean anything else. 
There is no division within life that would be sufficient grounds 
for saying that it means something beyond itself. 
Now if we use concepts to highlight something in life, then 
these serve first of all to describe life's singularity. These general 
concepts, therefore, serve to express the intelligibility of life. Here 
there is only a loose relationship in progressing from what is pre-
supposed to what comes next: what is new does not follow for-
mally from the presupposition. But understanding advances from 
a characteristic already grasped to a new one that can be under-
stood on its basis. This inner relationship consists in the possibility 
of re-creating or re-experiencing. This is the general method as 
soon as understanding leaves the sphere of words and their sense 
and does not look for the sense of signs but for the much deeper 
sense of a manifestation of life. This method was first anticipated 
by Fichte. Life is like a melody in which the notes do not express 
realities embedded in life. The melody lies in life itself. 
235 
r. The simplest case in which meaning arises is the understand-
ing of a sentence. Each individual word has a meaning, and we 
derive the sense of the sentence by combining them. We proceed 
so that the intelligibility of the sentence comes from the meaning 
of individual words. To be sure, there is a reciprocity between 
17 bedeutend. 
1
" bedeutsam. 
19 Bedeutung. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
2 55 
whole and parts by virtue of which the indeterminacy of sense, 
namely, the possibilities of sense, (are established) in relation to 
individual words. 
2. The same relationship exists between the parts and the whole 
of a life-course, and here also the understanding of the whole, the 
sense of life, [arises] from the meaning . . . 
3. With reference to a life-course, this relationship of meaning 
and sense is as follows: The particular events that constitute the 
life-course as it unfolds in the sensible world have a relationship to 
something that they mean, like the words of a sentence. Through 
this relationship, each particular lived experience is gathered to-
gether for its meaning on the basis of some whole. As the words in 
a sentence are connected into its intelligibility, so the togetherness 
of these lived experiences produces the meaning of a life-course. It 
is the same with history. 
4· This concept of meaning [associated with a life-course or a 
history] has emerged only with reference to the procedure of un-
derstanding. It involves merely a relation of something outer, given 
in sense, to something inner of which it is the expression. But it is 
essentially different from a grammatical relation. When the parts 
of life express something inner, this is not just a mode of verbal 
signification, etc. 
5. Accordingly, the words "meaning," "intelligibility," "sense of 
a life-course," or "history" do nothing more than indicate the re-
lation inherent in understanding between events and the inner 
nexus by which they are understood. 
6. What we are seeking is the type of connectedness that is 
proper to life itself- a connectedness rooted in particular life-
events. For any event to contribute to this connectedness, it must 
possess something of the meaning of life; otherwise, this meaning 
could not arise from the nexus of events. Just as the natural sci-
ences have their universal schematism in concepts that explicate 
the causality prevailing in the physical world, and a distinctive 
methodology for attaining conceptual cognition of it, so the cate-
gories of life disclose to us their relations to one another, their 
schematism, and the methods to grasp them. With the former, 
however, we are dealing with an abstract system whose logical 
nature is completely transparent. With the latter, we expect to un-
236 
derstand the connectedness of life itself although it can never be 
entirely accessible to conceptual cognition. 
We understand life only in a continual approximation. It is in-
herent to the nature of understanding (and) of life that they show 
256 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
us entirely different aspects at the different points in which their 
temporal flow is apprehended. The category of meaning first man-
ifests itself in memory (whenever we remember). Every present is 
filled with reality, to which we assign a positive or a negative 
value. And as we face the future, the categories of purpose, ideal, 
and giving shape to life arise. It is the mystery of life that it real-
izes some principal purpose to which all individual purposes are 
subordinated. Life realizes a highest good; it should be determined 
by ideals, and it exhibits a process of shaping. Each of these con-
cepts includes within its perspective the whole of life. Therefore 
each has the character of a category through which the whole of 
life is understood. None of these categories can be subordinated to 
any other, since each discloses the whole of life to understanding 
from a different perspective. They are thus incapable of being 
compared to one another. Nevertheless, one distinction becomes 
evident. Our experience of the present discloses a plurality of dis-
tinctive values that cannot be united and are at best comparable. 
From this value-perspective, life appears as an infinite source of 
existential value, both negative and positive, and of distinctive 
values. Life is a chaos, full of harmonies and dissonances- but the 
dissonances cannot be resolved into harmonies. To the extent that 
a tonal formation fills the present, it possesses no musical relation-
ship to an earlier or later one. And the means-end relation be-
tween productive values and intrinsic values posits only causal re-
lationships, whose mechanical character does not reach into the 
depths of life. 
The categories that apprehend life under the perspective of the 
future presuppose the categories of value; they differentiate into 
the various possibilities of forging ahead into the future. 
The connectedness implicit in life obtains its explication only in 
the relation of the meaning of events of life to the understanding 
and the sense of the whole of life. Only in this region can the 
category supersede mere coordination and subordination. In this 
way the categorial attitudes of value and purpose as distinct facets 
of the understanding of life are assimilated into a total intelligi-
237 
bility. 
MEANING AND STRUCTURE 
I. The connectedness of lived experience in its concrete reality 
lies in the category of meaning. This is the unity that gathers the 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
257 
sequence of what has been experienced or re-experienced into 
memory. Its meaning does not consist in a unifying point that lies 
outside lived experience, but is contained in these lived experi-
ences and constitutes their connectedness. 
This connectedness is, consequently, the peculiar mode of rela-
tion or category inherent in the nature of everything that can be 
experienced. 
Where the meaning of life as experienced by an individual, 
whether it be I or another person or a nation, may be located is 
not unequivocally determined by the fact that there is such a mean-
ing. But that it exists is always certain to the one remembering it 
as a relation of what can be experienced. Only in the final moment 
of a life can its meaning be fully appreciated, and thus, strictly 
speaking, it can appear only for a moment at the end of life or 
reappear in someone who re-experiences this life. 
Luther's life thus acquires its meaning as the connectedness of 
all the concrete events involved in the conception and develop-
ment of a new religiosity. This religiosity then forms a phase in the 
more inclusive concrete nexus of what precedes and follows. Mean-
ing is now viewed historically. One can also, however, seek this 
meaning in the positive values of life, etc. Then it exists in relation 
to subjective feeling. 
2. Here it becomes evident that meaning does not coincide ei-
ther with values or with their connectedness in a life. 
3. While meaning is the category for the unanalyzed life-nexus, 
the category of structure first appears from an analysis of life 
where what is alive in it recurs. Analysis in this sense seeks exclu-
sively for what is inherent in this recurrent element. It finds noth-
ing more than such inherence. What inheres has been singled out, 
and its conceptualization is only valid when it is connected with a 
consciousness of the life-nexus in which it is contained. 
How far can this analysis go? The atomistic psychology of the 
natural sciences was followed by the Brentano school, which is a 
kind of psychological scholasticism, for it creates abstract entities 
such as kinds of attitude, object, content, from which it wants to 
compose life. Husserl is an extreme instance of this. 
In contrast to this [we start with] the whole of life. Structure: 
238 
the connectedness of this whole as conditioned by real relations of 
concern about the external world. An attitude is only one such 
relation of concern. Feeling or will are merely concepts that direct 
us to re-create corresponding aspects of life. 
258 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
MEANING, SIGNIFICANCE, VALUE 
r. Every aspect of the objective world that relates to life in inter-
pretation and that displays itself in the overall objectification of 
life as a life-manifestation is a whole that has parts. It in turn is 
a part of some whole because it belongs to the nexus of reality, 
which is everywhere articulated into parts that again belong to a 
larger nexus of reality. Thus it is important in this dual reference 
as a member of a larger whole. This is the mark that life gives to 
everything that is experienced and re-experienced, for lived experi-
ence involves taking a stance, an attitudinal position to everything 
that manifests itself in a particular life-relationship, whether it 
concerns economic existence, friendship, or an invisible world. It 
is a productive nexus that is conditioned by this stance, this inner 
position. Life involves relations to things about which it adopts 
a stance, an attitude. Examples of such relations are being es-
tranged, withdrawing from a life-relationship, being selective, 
love, retreating into oneself, longing for something, opposition, 
needing something, postulating it, veneration, stability of form, 
formlessness, the contradiction between life and objectivity, the 
powerlessness of life over against what is objective, the will to 
overcome what is unbearable in existing objectifications so that 
life can again enjoy itself, ideal, memory, separation, and unification. 
The life-nexus contains its own suffering about its finitude, its 
own tendency to overcome it and to strive for realization and ob-
jectification, the negation of existing limits and their overcoming, 
separation, and connection. 
Predicates derived from life itself are unholiness, poverty, the 
beauty of life, freedom, mode of life, nexus, development, inner 
logic, inner dialectic. 
Oppositions between a this-worldly and an otherworldly stance, 
transcendence and immanence, reconciliation. 
2. The resulting relations of concern se ve to establish the signif-
icance of the singular aspects of life. 
ignificance is the deter-
239 
minateness of meaning of a part for a w ole that comes about on 
the basis of a productive nexus or syste . In the conduct of life 
within a productive nexus, significance 
anifests itself as a rela-
tionship of its constituents that extends urther than the lived ex-
perience of being productive. Significanc connects these constitu-
ents in an order that is independent of roductivity. Productivity 
constitutes everything that happens in 1' fe. But the observer sees 
only what has been produced because t e productivity of the self 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
259 
is not cognizable. Attitudinal position and stance, however, go 
deeper in positing the mode of productivity of life itself. All con-
cepts that have been d~veloped here are life-concepts inherent in 
life. They obtain a new context in every life-unit, in every period. 
Each of them imparts its own coloring to everything that is there 
for life. Spatial relationships such as breadth, width, height, and 
depth are accentuated by our attitudinal position; the same holds 
for time .... 
3. A nexus is produced in anthropological reflection, in art, in 
history, and in philosophy according to these relationships in 
which we always merely make conscious what inheres in life. 
Anthropological reflection is first. Its nexus is based on produc-
tive systems such as of the passions, etc.; it projects their types and 
expresses the significance of these systems for the whole of life. 
Since the consideration of one's own life works in conjunction 
with that of other persons, lived experience and understanding of 
one's self, understanding of other persons, and human acquain-
tance, generalizations arise in which value, meaning, and the pur-
pose of life are expressed in a new way. They form a sphere of 
their own that lies between life itself and the art of universal his-
torical narrative. It is a literature of almost boundless scope. Here 
the question arises how historical categories mediate its mode of 
understanding. 
If our study of the human being is limited to the science of 
psychology as it has evolved today, then it cannot do justice to the 
historical course of this study, which has approached the human 
being from quite divergent angles. The most extreme opposition 
existing in this domain, however, is between what I once desig-
nated as psychology with content- it may also be called concrete 
psychology or anthropology- and the actual science of psychol-
ogy. Anthropology is closely involved in questions about the mean-
ing and the value of life, because it stands so close to concrete life. 
240 
It has attempted to distinguish in life-courses of a certain type, 
stages in which the significance of life is fulfilled according to a 
specific type. 
The neo-Platonic type, the mystical type of the Middle Ages, 
and the stages in Spinoza [are examples of these]. 
A fulfillment of the meaning of life occurs in these schemata. 
Poetry is rooted in the event as a productive nexus of life. Every 
kind of literature is somehow connected with an event that has 
been experienced or that is to be understood. It shapes the event 
by raising its parts to significance in the imagination according to 
260 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
its characteristic of freely creating form. Everything that was said 
earlier about the conduct of life constitutes literature, and it gives 
forceful expression to this concern about life itself. Each thing re-
ceives a coloring that stems from its relation to the conduct of 
life- even such spatial terms as wide, high, and far. Past and pres-
ent are not mere determinations of reality, but through his re-
experiencing, the poet revives the concern about life that receded 
in the course of intellectual development and practical interests. 
4· Significance, which appropriates a fact as a meaning-constitu-
ent determined by a whole, manifests a life-concern and not an 
intellectual relationship, and does not project reason or thought 
into this part of the overall event. Significance is derived from life 
itself. If we designate as the sense of a life-whole the connected-
ness resulting from the meaning of the parts, then the poetic work 
expresses the sense of life by means of freely creating a meaning 
context. The event becomes a symbol of life. 
Starting with anthropological reflection, everything involves the 
illumination and explication of life itself; it is the same with po-
etry. What is hidden in the depths of life and is not accessible to 
observation and reasoning, poetry is able to mine. Thus poets and 
writers create the impression of being inspired. 
The limitation of poetry is that no method is at hand here for 
understanding life. Its phenomena are not arranged into a system. 
Its strength lies in the direct relation of concern between some 
event and life, whereby a poem becomes an immediate expression 
241 
of the event and the free creation that takes the significance that 
has been seen and expresses it intuitively in the events themselves. 
History is the domain of life apprehended both as its objectifica-
tion in the sequence of time and as its formation in accordance 
with temporal and productive relationships. History is a whole 
that is never possible to complete. On the basis of what is con-
tained in the sources and of what has happened, the historian 
shapes a sequence, a productive system. And he is obliged to raise 
the reality of this sequence to consciousness. 
Here the meaning of the part is determined by its relationship to 
the whole, but in respect to this whole as the objectification of life, 
it is understood on the basis of some relation of concern. 
VALUES 
A realm of values extends far and wide as a fact of our spiritual 
life. That fact itself designates a relation of our own life to objects 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
whose very character is expressed in the determination of the value 
of these objects. This means that value is not primarily a product 
of concept-formation in the service of objective thought. It can 
become conceptual insofar as, on the one hand, such a product re-
presents an attitudinal position and as, on the other hand, it enters 
into objective relations. It is the same with the assessment of values. 
This belongs in like manner to an attitude that is independent of 
objective apprehension. The term "feeling of value" in this sense 
must be given a new interpretation. Value is the abstract expres-
sion for the designated attitude. Now as a rule, values are derived 
psychologically. This corresponds to the general procedure of de-
duction from psychology. But this method is questionable, because 
then what counts as a value and the deductive relationships among 
values will become dependent on the psychological starting point. 
And the transcendental deduction that opposes unconditional values 
to conditioned ones is unsuccessful for the same reason. Here also the 
procedure must be reversed. It is proper to begin with expressions 
that contain all kinds of valuations and to master all of them. Only 
then can one inquire into the attitudinal position involved. 
The changing images of life itself give fleeting indications of 
positive and negative attitudes, pleasure, delight, approval, and 
satisfaction; then objects constructed to last become the carriers of 
the memory~content of these feelings, and they re-present multiple 
possibilities of states of mind. Thought frees this complex of such 
242 
possibilities of affecting the mind from the object itself and refers 
them to these states of mind; this is how we come to intuit and 
conceptualize value. Because value always contains this special re-
lation to a subject capable of being affected, which is distinct from 
the properties that characterize the reality of the object, it assumes 
a special status by contrast to these properties. The manifold ways 
that an object can affect the mind grows with life itself. This in-
volves a pattern whereby memory tends more and more to domi-
nate a present affection. This is how value makes itself increas-
ingly independent of every sudden appearance and disappearance 
of affection. This concept of value can even encompass a complex 
of past possibilities associated with objects that persist over time. 
And on the basis of the practical relationship in which the will 
assesses values relative to some purpose, the comparative estima-
tion of values comes about. With this, value attains a relation to 
the future as a good or an end. Value thereby attains a new con-
ceptual independence: its moments can be placed within a hier-
archically ordered set of overall assessments. Even when freed 
262 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
from the relation to the will, its moments continue to subsist in 
this new independence. This is the contribution of lived experience 
to the gradual development of the concept of value. Once again I 
am only isolating this function as an analytic procedure, not as a 
temporal stage. 
In reflection, when the "I'' becomes absorbed in itself, the fur-
ther possibility arises that the "I" will become an object to itself. 
As such, it supports the possibility of enjoying itself and of provid-
ing others with an object of enjoyment. In the latter aspect, it is no 
different from objects to which the possibility of being enjoyed 
attaches, except that they themselves cannot enjoy what they are 
and what they achieve. But when the being that can be affected in 
multiple ways becomes its own object and capable of a feeling of 
self that encompasses everything it produces and what it enjoys in 
producing, then a distinctive concept of the intrinsic value of the 
person emerges. This concept of intrinsic value is denied to all 
beings that seem to us incapable of such enjoyment of self. The 
Renaissance developed the concept of the monad for this. In a 
monad, a thing, its enjoyment, value, and perfection, are unified. 
And Leibniz infused German philosophy and literature with this 
concept and with the strong feeling that it carries within itself. 
243 
Understanding the value of another individual contributes some-
thing else to the development of the concept of value. Of primary 
importance in what is experienced in our own life is the produc-
tive force with which another individual affects us. But as under-
standing reconstructs this other individual, our concept of and in-
sight into value become increasingly emancipated from the way 
our feelings are affected. For these are not only re-created, they 
are referred to another subject. The result of this, then, is that we 
apprehend with much greater clarity the relations between the pos-
sibilities of producing an effect and the feeling of self of the 
subject that lives in these possibilities. The intrinsic value of the 
person now manifests itself fully in external objectivity and calmly 
discloses itself in all its objective relations to the world around this 
person. Only one barrier still remains that will only be overcome 
by historical distance. At first, understanding is still mixed with 
comparison with our self, self-satisfaction, envy, jealousy, and suf-
fering due to the productive force of the other; we lack the stan-
dard for evaluation that a survey of the past offers. 
Value involves an objective mode of signification by means of a 
concept. In it life is extinguished. However, it has not lost its refer-
ence to life. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
As soon as the concept of value is formed, however, it becomes 
a productive force by virtue of its reference to life, because it 
gathers together that which in life is piecemeal, obscure, and 
ephemeral. If values are disclosed in history, and evaluative atti-
tudes in documents that are expressions of life, then through re-
experiencing, their original reference to life can be recovered. 
Whole and Parts 
Life as it elapses in time or as spatially distributed is categorially 
articulated in terms of the relationship of whole to parts. History, 
as the fulfillment of life in what occurs sequentially and simul-
taneously, is then, categorially speaking, a further articulation of 
this relation of parts to the whole. This part-whole relation is not 
like the configuration of objects that someone would see when 
entering a room. These objects belong together only by reference 
to the life of a person who owns them. Otherwise they could as 
well be dispersed. No inherent relationship to each other links 
them together. How different this is in a historical process! From 
the viewpoint of the natural sciences, every totality is an indif-
ferent sum of masses in motion. Movement and mass and their 
relation according to laws are never changing in the course of 
time. By contrast, in every configuration of life, there is an inner 
244 
relation of a part to whole, and therefore this configuration is 
never indifferent .... 
This belonging together manifests itself in quite diverse life-
concerns and in a different way in each one. 
Development, Essence, and Other Categories 
Here two new categories emerge. Life and the life-course consti-
tute a nexus. Through the acquisition of new lived experiences on 
the basis of older ones, what I call the "acquired psychic nexus" is 
created. [There are several] forms of such a nexus. As a conse-
quence, duration and systematic continuity exist amidst change. I 
designate this state of affairs, verifiable in all human life, by the 
category of essence. Essence has constant change as its other side. 
Implicit in this is that any change incorporating outside influences 
into a unitary life-nexus is at the same time defined by this nexus. 
This is the way the character of each life-course develops. Once 
245 
264 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
this has been impartially apprehended, we can abandon all theo-
retical tenets about progressive development through stages. 
How does the life-course generally proceed? It is always limited 
by being the determinateness of an individual existence marked by 
singular states. [This goes beyond] being spatially bounded. [Our 
concept of limit] is rooted in spirit. Singular existence is individu-
ality. This mode of delimitation from within produces suffering 
and the striving to overcome it. This is the tragedy of finitude and 
the incentive also to transcend it. From without, limitation mani-
fests itself as the pressure of the world on the subject. It can be-
come so forceful through the power of circumstances and the na-
ture of the mind that it impedes progress. In most cases, however, 
the nature of finitude in life also produces the effect of overcoming 
the pressure of the new life-situation and of other relationships to 
human beings. As every new situation bears the same characteris-
tic of finitude, the same will to power stemming from the state of 
being conditioned, and the same will to inner freedom that is 
caused by inner bounds also arise in it. Nevertheless, everything is 
held together by these bounds and by the inner productive force 
that results from the determinateness of individual existence and 
the consequent durability of the acquired nexus. In all this the 
same essence is active throughout the course [of a life]: always the 
same delimitation of possibilities and yet the freedom to choose 
among them, and accordingly the good feeling of being able to 
move forward and to fulfill new possibilities of one's own exis-
tence. This nexus that is determined from within the course of a 
life and that determines the ceaseless progression of changes I call 
"development." 
This concept is entirely different from speculative fantasies about 
a progression to higher and higher stages. To be sure, development 
does involve an increase of distinctiveness and of differentiation, 
etc. in the subject. But it is possible for a life-course to remain 
bound to the natural background of vegetative growth, maturity, 
and decay occurring between birth and death without fulfilling 
any higher meaning, just as in the lower realms of life. It can also 
begin to decline early or continue to progress until the end. 
IV. Biography 
I. THE SCIENTIFIC CHARACTER OF BIOGRAPHY 
The opinions of historians are divided about the scientific charac-
ter of biography. The question of whether to classify it as a part of 
historical science or whether to give it a special, independent place 
in the system of the human sciences next to historical science is, in 
the last analysis, a question of terminology. The answer to it de-
pends upon the definition that one assigns to the expression "his-
torical science." At the outset of every discussion about biography, 
the methodological and epistemological issue arises whether biog-
raphy is possible as a universally valid solution to a scientific prob-
lem. I take as my starting point that the object of history is given 
to us in the totality of the objectifications of life. Embedded in the 
content of nature we find manifestations of human spirit, from 
evanescent gestures and fleeting words to immortal poetic works, 
the order that we have assigned to nature and to ourselves, and 
the legal systems and constitutions under which we live. They con-
stitute the outer reality of human spirit. The documents on which 
a biography is principally based consist of the traces left for us by 
what a personality has done and expressed. Letters and reports 
about a person naturally hold a unique place among them. 
The task of the biographer is to use such documents to under-
stand the productive nexus through which an individual is deter-
mined by his milieu and reacts to it. All of history is about com-
prehending productive systems. The historian penetrates more 
deeply into the structure of the historical world by differentiating 
specific productive systems and studying their life. Religion, art, 
the state, and political and religious organizations form such sys-
tems, permeating history at every point. The most basic of such 
systems is the life-course of an individual in the milieu by which it 
is influenced and on which it acts in return. This relationship al-
ready appears in the individual's memory: a life-course, its condi-
tions and its effects. Here we have the fundamental cell of history. 
For here specific historical categories arise. If life as sequential is 
247 
held together by the consciousness of selfsameness, then all mo-
ments of life have their basis in this category of selfsameness. The 
discrete is related to the continuous. As we traverse the thread of 
memories from the small childhood figure, living for the moment, 
to the adult who asserts his firm, stable, inner life against the 
266 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
world, we refer the series of influences and reactions to something 
that is shaping itself and therefore develops as something deter-
mined from within. External processes that exert an influence on 
this self have a practical value for it. The individual states of this 
self as well as the influences on it have a meaning in their relation-
ship to a life-course and to what is shaped within it. 
The literary expression of an individual's reflection on his life-
course is autobiography. When this reflection is carried beyond 
one's own life-course to understanding another's life, biography 
originates as the literary form of understanding other lives. 
Every life can be described, the insignificant as well as the pow-
erful, the everyday as well as the out of the ordinary. Interest in 
doing so can stem from a variety of perspectives. A family retains 
its memories. Theorists of criminal law want to record the life of a 
thief, psychopathologists the life of an abnormal person. Every-
thing human becomes a document for us that actualizes one of the 
infinite possibilities of our existence. But the historical individual 
whose life has produced lasting effects is worthy in a superior 
sense to live on in biography as a work of art. And among these, 
the ones who will especially attract the attention of biographers to 
themselves are those whose actions issue from depths of human 
existence that are especially difficult to understand and that there-
fore grant a deeper insight into human life and its individual con-
figurations. 
How can anyone deny that biography is especially significant 
for understanding the great nexus of the historical world? After 
all, it is the very relationship between the depths of human nature 
and the universal nexus of the full scope of historical life that is at 
work at every point of history. This is the most basic connection 
between life itself and history. 
Our problem becomes even more pressing: Is biography possible? 
248 
The life-course of a historical (personality) is a productive nexus 
in which the individual receives influences from the historical 
world, is molded by them, and then, in turn, exerts an influence 
on the historical world. It is the same sphere of the world that 
influences the individual and receives lasting influences from him 
in turn. The possibility of scientific biography rests on this very 
point, that the individual does not face a limitless play of forces in 
the historical world: he dwells in the sphere of the state, religion, 
or science- in brief, in a distinctive life-system or in a constella-
tion of them. The inner structure of such a constellation draws the 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
individual into it, shapes him, and determines the direction of his 
productivity. Historical achievements stern from the possibilities 
inherent in the inner structure of a historical moment. 
If one surveys Schleierrnacher's life, his biography seems to frag-
ment into a diverse set of activities. Closer study shows, however, 
that what is imposing about his personality is the inner coherence 
that ties together his influence on religion, philosophy, and criti-
cism and his contributions to the reinterpretation of Plato and the 
apostle Paul, and to both church and state. It also indicates a 
unique power of lived experience and understanding, a serenely 
held reflective attitude that accompanies him in the midst of his 
life and work and allows him to objectify them. On the basis of the 
steady stewardship of a higher consciousness, his soul is able to raise 
itself above fortune, suffering, and the way of the world .... 
2. BIOGRAPHY AS A WORK OF ART 
Autobiography is an understanding of oneself. Its object is life as 
the life-course of an individual. Here lived experience is the con-
stant and direct basis for understanding and determining the sense 
of this individual life. Lived experience possesses the individual 
parts of an acquired psychic nexus as a constantly advancing pres-
ent that articulates a whole. What is new can be experienced as 
efficacious and related back to remembered active constituents [to 
form] a productive nexus. But this nexus does not manifest itself 
as a completed system of effects. Rather, in each action starting in 
the present, there is the consciousness of aiming at ends. They 
form a productive nexus in which desires also incorporate purposes. 
The productive nexus [of a life-course] is experienced first of all 
249 
as the fulfillment of ends- at least this is the case for what usually 
exists in the foreground of consciousness. Objects, changes, and 
lived experiences are incorporated in this productive nexus as 
means. The ends produce a life-plan, which is a nexus that relates 
purposes to each other and to means. When we make plans in the 
present, this presupposes a value-consciousness able to complete 
the present with the pleasures, illusions, etc. of the past. This is the 
way the categorial approach leads up to the category of meaning 
as formed on the basis of the past. Meaning involves the relation 
of a single, external occurrence to something inner that inheres in 
a connectedness among occurrences. This nexus is not measured 
by any final stage reached [in life] but is oriented around a central 
268 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
point to which everything external relates as to something inner. 
What is external is an infinite series of effects that contain a sense. 
Only this sense (creates unity). 
Understanding takes place with reference to all external givens 
[of a life]. These are available till the point of death, although we 
are limited by what has been preserved. Here lies the advantage of 
biography over autobiography. 
Biography can apply understanding to manifestations that indi-
cate plans or an awareness of meaning. Letters can show what this 
individual finds to be of value in his situation; or they can indicate 
what he finds meaningful in particular parts of his past. A nexus 
develops, leading to an understanding- a talent gains ground and 
becomes conscious of itself. Circumstances, errors, passions, may 
sidetrack it, or a favorable environment may strengthen its cre-
ative power. Challenges from without impose themselves and lead 
it beyond itself for better or worse, etc. Here we have the abiding 
advantage that a single life-course preserves in material form the 
reference of what is publicly available of a life to its inner mean-
ing; the evidence itself expresses this relation, like the well-known 
confession of Goethe.20 And the observer already possesses a con-
sciousness of historical influence and limits. 
Letters disclose momentary states of mind, but they are also 
influenced by being directed to a recipient. They manifest life-rela-
tionships, but each life-relationship is only seen from one side. 
However, when a life has become complete or a part of history 
and can be assessed for its meaning, this is only possible if its 
connection with the past, with what influences it in its surround-
ings and with how they affect its future, can be established through 
250 
the interpretation of the available documents. These documents 
show the individual to be a point of intersection that both experi-
ences force and exerts it. Yet the meaning of an individual life in a 
historical context can be determined only if we can solve the problem 
of locating some general nexus independent of this individual. ... 
Biography as a work of art, therefore, cannot solve its task 
without proceeding to the history of the period. 
With that, however, the perspective changes. The interpretation 
of individuals has its limits in the fact that the way in which they 
are centered in themselves is also the way that biographers focus 
on them. For biography to be a work of art, one has to locate the 
perspective from which the horizon of history in general opens up 
20 See my essay, "Goethe and the Poetic Imagination" (D), SW 5, 282£. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
but for which the individual still remains the center of a produc-
tive or meaning system; no biography can perform this task with 
more than partial success. On the one hand, it must display an 
objective context with the diversity of its forces, their determina-
tion in history, and the values of these determinations- a con-
sciousness of unboundedness that extends in every direction-
must always be present; on the other hand, the centrality of the 
individual as a point of reference must be retained. From this it 
follows that the art form of biography can be applied only to his-
torical personalities. For they alone have the productive force to 
become such a central point of intersection. 
The difficulty of working out, as it were, this twofold perspec-
tive of the biographer can never be completely overcome. 
The standing of biography within historical scholarship has 
risen extraordinarily. It was heralded by the novel. Carlyle is per-
haps the first to have grasped the full significance of biography. It 
is due to this that the greatest problem to emerge after the devel-
opment of the Historical School through Ranke lies in the rela-
tionship between life in all its diverse aspects and historiography. 
History ought to preserve this relationship as a whole. In the end, 
all the foregoing questions about the value of history have their 
solution in this, that human beings recognize themselves in history. 
We do not grasp human nature through introspection. This was 
Nietzsche's colossal delusion. Therefore, he also could not grasp 
the significance of history. 
The more encompassing problem of history is implicit in Hegel. 
From one side, this problem was raised through the study of the 
relatively ahistoricallife of primitive peoples, for there we encoun-
ter the uniform recurrence of the same life content. This is like the 
natural foundation of all history. When prominent human person-
251 
alities evoked an entirely new kind of study, this made the limits of 
humanity visible from the other side. Between them both lay the 
study of customs. The starting points were Carlyle's biography, 
Jacob Burkhardt's grasp of a specific cultural whole from its very 
foundations, Macaulay's portrayals of customs, and Jacob and 
Wilhelm Grimm. This is the foundation on which biography as a 
work of art obtains a new meaning and a new content. 
The limit of biography lies in the fact that general movements 
find their point of transition in individuals. In order to understand 
individuals, we must investigate new foundations for understand-
ing that are outside the individual. As such, biography does not 
have the potential of defining itself as a scientific work of art. We 
270 
PLAN FORCONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
must turn to new categories, configurations, and forms of life that 
do not appear in individual life. Individuals are only the points 
of intersection for cultural systems and social organizations with 
which their existence is interwoven; how can the cultural and so-
cial be understood on the basis of the individual? 
SECTION Two: CoNCEPTUAL CoGNITION oF THE NExus 
2 52 
OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY 
Introduction 
I. HISTORY 
We now move beyond the stable relations of autobiography. Leav-
ing the stream of a life-course behind, we become caught up in an 
infinite ocean. 
r. The different perspectives of value, meaning, and purpose 
persist, but their mode of combination changes. 
2. The subject in whom and for whom the meaning of life is 
realized has become questionable. Does happiness exist only for 
individuals (Lotze)? 
3. If we take an individual or a person, etc., as subject, this 
generates a distinctive perspective in terms of which meaning, 
sense, etc. are apprehended. Simmel [has written] on this question. 
Divergent truths [are often] falsely reconciled. But these divergent 
perspectives can attain objectivity in universal history by means of 
the systematic sciences. 
[How does] history [make] intuitable what is inner and outer, 
what is simultaneous and successive? Consider also the problem of 
narrating or exhibiting the temporal course of a series that is as 
such infinitely divisible. Lived experience without really having a 
lived experience ... 
History liberates us by elevating us beyond the limits of the 
meaning-perspective arising from our own life-course. At the same 
time, meaning becomes less certain. Reflecting upon life makes us 
profound; history sets us free. 
To navigate this wide ocean, we take with us the orientational 
tools that we have acquired from lived experience, understanding, 
autobiography, and the art of biography. They are the historical 
categories that have emerged from reflection on life to become the 
intellectual means for apprehending it. The category of wholeness 
is already given in understanding. The passage of time in the course 
of a life involves the relationship of parts to a whole. Biography 
generates the category of a qualitatively distinct individual exis-
tence. Because an individual life is conditioned from without and 
253 
reacts outwardly, the categories of agency and suffering come with 
it. Every distinct individual life is a productive force in history and 
272 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
at the same time interacts with other productive forces. Individual 
human existence runs its course in a life span, with many moments 
in which suffering and pressure are experienced as constraints 
leading it to advance to another more suitable state. Individual 
human existence finds happiness in this kind of advance- perhaps 
its happiness inheres in such an advancing, thereby both conserv-
ing and changing itself in every situation. The law operative in 
individual life regulates these changes so that what has been ac-
quired at every point determines the future from within. Accord-
ingly, the historical categories of essence and development emerge 
from individual life. Here essence only denotes something that en-
dures through change, and development only the form of a pro-
cess determined by the law of an expanding acquired nexus. Lived 
experience and comprehension of individual human beings do not 
disclose development as a kind of progress. 
2. THE NEW TASK 
When we look backwards, we see an inner coherence among those 
categories that are characteristic of the human sciences. 1 
The relations of the categories to one another constitute a nexus 
through which we arrive at an understanding of qualitatively de-
terminate particular life, i.e., the individual. We now grasp the 
coherence in these relations in which understanding comprehends 
the meaning of a given reality, i.e., a qualitatively determinate in-
dividual life. The latter manifests a relationship of whole to parts 
all throughout, from expression back to the subject of all expres-
sions. This whole-part relationship is a nexus, that is, a structure, 
from which essence and development can be derived. And by ap-
plying this relation that exists in every individual being to all its 
expressions, understanding of this individual arises by way of the 
categories of value, meaning, and purpose. In this understanding 
the individual is reconstructed as a kind of system of human spirit 
by means of the concepts already indicated .... 
' See my Jugendgeschichte Hegels, GS IV, 139. (D) 
A First Projection of a Continuation of the Formation 
2 54 
of the Historical World in the Human Sciences 
I. FUNDAMENTAL RELATIONSHIP: THE STRUCTURE 
OF HISTORICAL FORMATIONS 
When we confront historical formations, we empirically discover 
in them a unity and connectedness in virtue of which they become 
objects for us of a more encompassing order. Each formation acts 
in the historical nexus through an inherent productive force; it has 
its own essence in which a development takes place exhibiting a 
new law that extends beyond individual development. Thus new 
tasks arise: 
How is it possible to delineate development through concepts? 
The circle of concept formation. 
What further articulation do the categories and concepts of in-
dividual existence undergo? 
How is objective conceptual cognition possible here? 
TURNING TO WORI.D HISTORY 
The first problem to present itself for those turning to history is 
the relationship of life and history. The path we have been follow-
ing leads there. At every point of the spatiotemporal expanse of 
history, there is some living and productive psyche endowed with 
formative powers and sensitive to every influence. Each document 
of major importance is the expression of such a psyche. The fact 
that documents of this kind are so rare for any period of time 
results from the way historical memory selects from the welter of 
written records. History lets everything that does not have mean-
ing turn to dust and ashes. Here we must again consider the cate-
gory of meaning. Basically everything has meaning if, as the ex-
pression of any human heart with a pulse beat, it (allows us to see) 
whatever had the possibility of being a lived experience at some 
point of time. It is important to investigate how the psyche itself is 
always bound to determinate possibilities under certain temporal 
and spatial conditions- one instance, so to speak, among the lim-
itless possibilities that the historical process brings about. 
Looking at historians, we see that all of them possess a relation-
ship to the great fund of human memory through the notion of re-
presenting or portraying an age by means of certain people. Ma-
255 
274 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
caulay and other English historians approach this problem more 
closely. 
THE LOGICAL NEXUS IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
The point of departure of the human sciences is lived experience, 
which provides a structural nexus. Such a life-nexus is present 
whenever the human sciences re-present life. It is there when I 
hear a story or read about a historical deed, or when I think about 
a system of political economics either in terms of labor or value, 
or about the juridical system of a statute, or the political system of 
a constitution. Some life-nexus always inheres in these systems 
and produces their understanding. Re-presentations recall the life-
nexus; and similarly the temporal flow that permeates all human 
reality is always operative when reality is apprehended. It is the 
same temporal flow in the historical world and in myself as I ob-
serve it. And the human mind has the capacity to contract this flux 
and speed it up while finding the standard of duration in the life-
course itself. Thus the playwright presents what took years to hap-
pen in an ideal temporal order of a few hours. 
THE HISTORICAL WORLD AND MEANING 
The historical categories of value and purpose grow out of lived 
experience. However, the experiencing subject looking back al-
ready finds meaning in the process of understanding and relates 
the categorial form of nexus to itself. 
To the extent that a nexus appears in history, we simply (apply) 
the concept of meaning. It must be applied to the entire scope of 
reality. History is everywhere that life has been and is becoming 
intelligible. And where there is history, we find meaning in its 
manifold forms. Meaning is present when individuals re-present 
something more encompassing by gathering it within themselves, 
endowing it, as it were, with a singular, bounded visibility. Mean-
ing is also present when a nexus is transformed by an event, per-
son, or a community. In history there is never merely an aggregate 
as the sum of the consequences. 
VALUE AND HISTORY 
r. Similarly, values in the historical world continue to be related 
to the way the affections light up, shine, and fade. No value here 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
2 75 
is real that is not connected with such fluctuations of mental life. 
A confusing and endless manifold arises here, an infinite horizon, 
256 
like when we behold a strange city as its evening lights become 
visible, burn brightly, and fade into the distance. This play of 
lights belongs to a world of objects completely alien to us- even 
disassociated from us in time and space. In this way, the concept 
of intuition and the concept of value can be cultivated in a histori-
cal sense. The life of particular individuals has been summed up, 
and their distinctive worth can be fully surveyed. The result is a 
new assessment of values that has nothing at all to do with practi-
cal conduct. We now obtain the standard for the highest distinc-
tive values accessible to us. The lines of gradation start from the 
average person, and the farther back one sees into the past, the 
more remote and objective they are. The effect of historical dis-
tance is exactly the same as that of distancing the person in a 
work of art. The very possibility of comparing our particular fate 
and value with what is historical diminishes. 
2. In this manifold of historical values, the first thing apparent 
is the distinction between matters that are only valuable through 
their utility and intrinsic values that are linked with a conscious-
ness of self-worth. The latter values provide the material for the 
historical world. They are like the notes from which the melodic 
web of the spiritual universe is composed. Each intrinsic or dis-
tinctive value claims a determinate place in this web through the 
relationship it has to others. Each value can be defined as a note 
according to loudness, pitch, and length, but individually it is 
something unique and indefinable, not only due to the relationship 
in which it exists, but in its very essence. 
Life is the fullness, the diversity, and the reciprocal interaction 
of everything uniform experienced by these individuals. The basic 
material of life is one with history, and history consists of all 
modes of life in the most diverse relationships. History is merely 
life apprehended from the perspective of the whole of humanity 
conceived as interconnected. 
These individuals, who as intrinsic values constitute life and his-
tory with their purposes and their meaning, are, before all else, 
productive forces. Once these value-laden forces are referred to 
the use-value of things, they also realize purposes. Accordingly, the 
historical world is filled with purposes- considered purely as a 
manifold of forces, it is a world suffused with purposes. 
Purposes also undergo a development from the point where a 
257 
subject considers the future, weighs values, and makes decisions 
276 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
about goods. Once a purpose has established itself in the house-
hold of human spirit, it emancipates itself from the process by 
which the subject projects it. Purposes become independently pro-
ductive forces within this new sphere. The first thing to be noted is 
that they are efficacious without being conscious and that their 
efficacy is sweeping. When passions and states of mind are at 
work in the historical world, they remain closely tied to the inner 
life of the person. This is not the case with purposes. 
LIVED EXPERIENCE, UNDERSTANDING, AND PRODUCTIVE NEXUS 
The first insight generated by lived experience and understanding 
is that they are about connectedness. We understand only connect-
edness. Understanding and connectedness or nexus correspond to 
one another. 
The relevant connectedness is that of a productive nexus. Every-
thing in the psychic life-unit, in history, and in cultural systems 
and organizations is in a constant state of change; and these 
changes are produced by something active. Such a productive rela-
tionship can exist either in an individual by means of its structure 
or in more complex sets of circumstances. That a productive nexus 
or system can display an immanent teleology does not change any-
thing, for this is only one of its forms. 
The relationship between parts and wholes2 is found everywhere 
in history and society, and it more closely determines the modes of 
productivity of the historical world. Thus we encounter initial 
constituents whose parts lack independence in that they cannot 
function without reference to the whole. 
Organic bodies are also wholes in this sense, whose parts do not 
function independently, but only in relationship to the whole that 
constitutes their essence. However, human psychophysical life-
units are wholes in a special sense. To be sure, every given is singu-
lar, whether it is organic, inorganic, or spiritual. The fact that we 
grasp the psychophysical process through thought and reflection 
would add to it a distinctive trait, but it still would not indicate 
completely what characterizes its connectedness. The psychic nexus 
is structural. It is a productive system in which what is productive 
endures as a psychic fact and is referred to its product. This pro-
ductive system extends to the relations between thinking about 
258 
and apprehending the given, between apprehending it and assign-
2 See above, GS VII, 243£. [this volume, 263]. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
277 
ing it value, between assigning value and positing goals. Within 
each one of these spheres, the reference to the sphere that consti-
tutes it contains special relations of the same kind. This whole 
system of relations functions teleologically in creating values and 
realizing goods and purposes. Among values, the intrinsic value of 
the person plays a special role. Its distinctive characteristic is that 
the life-unit takes pleasure in certain attributes to which its feeling 
of self adheres. Because these attributes are linked to an individual 
nucleus that is part of a personal life-nexus, this intrinsic value is 
individual. Intrinsic value always refers to the particular nexus of 
a singular person, by virtue of which, therefore, it is what it is, 
and feels and enjoys itself as that. The assessment of others 
heightens this relationship. Each individual is centered in itself. On 
the other hand, each community also develops values, and every 
historical movement aims at the same effect. Thus in any historical 
and social situation, intrinsic value and a sense of distinctive modes 
of existence make it possible to assign meaning to particular psy-
chic processes, while, on the other hand, the psychophysical unit 
can gain a meaning for the whole, especially in purposive systems. 
It is this meaning-nexus that is apprehended by the historian. It is 
not in turn evaluated, but rather is recognized as reality. But as 
such a reality it constitutes the way significance, the interests of 
the individual, and the nexus of significant moments relate to each 
other; in short, it articulates them in the temporal process. 3 
That which is enjoyed as the value of the person in its feeling of 
self is ... 
THE HISTORICAL NEXUS 
Hegel posed the problem of finding a system of concepts that 
would make us conscious of the historical nexus. [He explicated] 
such a system for metaphysics, philosophy of nature, and the hu-
man sciences. They are the ideal stages of spirit in which the self 
finds itself as spirit, objectifies itself in the external world, and 
recognizes itself as absolute spirit. 
With this Hegel intellectualized history. Not only is history rec-
ognized in concepts, but they constitute its essence, i.e., adequate 
cognition of history is made dependent on concepts. Spirit and 
history are revealed at last. They hold no more mystery. 
An actual historian's attitude toward history is totally different. 
' See Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW r, 58. 
278 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
259 
However, descriptions of the manifold details of historical phe-
nomena are equally unable to exhaust the nature of history. If we 
had only such descriptions, then we would lack conceptual cogni-
tion of history. Individuals qua individuals remain separate from 
each other. They do not allow us to grasp the most profound es-
sence of history, which is to objectify the spirit of community. 
The understanding of a historical product as the expression of 
something inner does not provide a logical identity, but a peculiar 
relation of a selfsameness in different individuals. Individuals do 
not understand one another through their identity; only concepts 
can be identical and interchangeable. Individuals understand each 
other because any individual has the possibilities, within certain 
limits, to re-experience from the expressions and effects produced 
by a very different individual the inner states and processes be-
longing to his inner life. Moreover, individuals have possibilities in 
themselves that extend beyond those that can be realized in their 
own lives. We all live in the acquired habitual routines of our own 
being. But there is also a consciousness of freedom that is rooted 
in the many possibilities of life inherent in memory and in willing 
the future. Because of this and the possibility that vitality can 
never be fixed, our imagination is able to surpass whatever we can 
experience and actualize by ourselves. 
HISTORICAL SKEPTICISM 
r. Something of which understanding is not possible cannot 
have meaning or value. A tree can never have meaning. 
Simmel's theory of history, that it is necessary to give it form, 
since we cannot sift through all its parts, is in error, because we 
can represent a very great number of parts through a comprehen-
sive survey. 
In what I select from a history of world changes, I never en-
counter a moment that ... In this respect the history of natural 
objects is different from human history. 
The principal argument of the historical skeptic is always that 
any productive nexus that operates in terms of motives is doubt-
ful; this is because the individual has only a very dubious cogni-
zance of his own motives, and others have even less insight into 
them. One can only establish to a limited extent what self-interest, 
ambition, the need for power, and vanity contribute to decisive 
actions. Even utterances about them, whether verbal or in letters, 
remain open to question. Here precisely, however, lies the proper 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
279 
field of what those cognizant about human beings and men of the 
world regard as true history. The French, in particular, like to 
26o 
prove their perspicacity, their superiority over things and people, 
by ascribing petty and selfish motives to great achievements. They 
are used to this from the pragmatic method, which investigates the 
relation between motive, act, and effect when they are not apply-
ing political theories or assessing military-political forces. This, 
then, leads to the prying into motives and the need to belittle often 
found in memoirs. The perspicacity of the French about personal 
motives, money, and social position is incomprehensible to Ger-
mans, who tend to be rather naive about personal goals and more 
conscientious about the matter at hand. 
The nature of pragmatic historiography is to search for a pro-
ductive system, but within the boundaries of a nexus of motive, 
act, and historical influence. The so-called moralism of Schlosser is 
a typical example. He is a pragmatic historian, with an admixture 
of the French tendency to belittle, but basing it on moral judgment. 
2. Historical skepticism can be overcome only if our methods 
are not expected to ascertain motives. 
3. Historical skepticism is overcome only when psychological 
subtlety is replaced by the understanding of the products of the 
human spirit. They lie there before us as an objectification in the 
external world, and therefore can become the object of rule-guided 
understanding. 
4· These objectifications fall into three classes. Understanding 
reaches the highest level of reliability in interpreting the domain of 
the sciences. [Here there is] interchangeability. 
Second in rank are the results of wisdom about life found in 
religion, art, and philosophy. In part these express one's own life-
nexus and in part they present a larger life-nexus. 
The domain of action and purpose constitutes the third and 
most difficult case. The relation between setting purposes, ascer-
taining means, and acting is rational and transparent, but it is 
quite different concerning the motives that determine what pur-
poses are chosen. Actions that have a general import and become 
historical are not accompanied by an awareness of motives. They 
certainly do have clear connections to the material necessities em-
bodied in purposive systems and in external organizations; mo-
tives, however, are completely irrelevant to what happens there, 
which merely depends on representations of purposes and possible 
261 
means. Thus the systematic human sciences referring to the practi-
cal world constitute the foundation of a secure understanding of it. 
280 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
At this point the method of understanding becomes more com-
plex by incorporating comparison, etc. 
THE POSSIBILITY OF OBJECTIVE CONCEPTUAL COGNITION 
IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
The problem of how objective conceptual cognition is possible in 
the human sciences reverts to the question of how to attain it in 
history. How is history possible? This question presupposes a con-
ception of history. We saw that the concept of history is dependent 
on the concept of life. Historical life is a part of life overall. Life, 
however, is what is given in lived experience and understanding. In 
this sense, life thus extends over the whole range of objective spirit 
insofar as it is accessible through lived experience. Life is the basic 
fact that must form the starting point of philosophy. Life is that 
with which we are acquainted from within and behind which we 
cannot go. We cannot bring life before the tribunal of reason. Life 
is historical to the degree that it is apprehended as advancing in 
time and as an emerging productive nexus. Life as history is possi-
ble because this process is re-created in memory, not as the repro-
duction of particulars, but as the re-creation of the nexus itself 
and its stages. What memory contributes to the comprehension of 
a life-course is brought about in history by the way in which the 
manifestations of life encompassed by objective spirit are linked in 
this advance and through the exertion of influence. That is history. 
The first condition for the formation of the historical world is 
the purification of the confused and corrupted recollections of the 
human race about itself through a critique that is correlated with 
interpretation. The fundamental historical science, therefore, is 
philology, in its formal sense, which encompasses the scientific 
study of the languages in which tradition has been deposited, the 
gathering of the legacy left behind by the human past, the removal 
of errors from it, and the chronological ordering and linking that 
brings out the inherent relatedness of these documents. Philology 
in this sense is not the handmaiden of history, but designates the 
initial scope of its procedures. 
262 
Historical objectivity is only possible if, among the diverse view-
points from which the overall nexus can be projected and its req-
uisite parts distinguished, there is one standpoint that grasps this 
nexus as it happened. 
First of all I will introduce the concept of meaning. The nexus 
of history is that of life itself insofar as life produces connected-
ness under the conditions of its natural environment. A part that 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
belongs to the nexus of the whole has a meaning relative to this 
whole to the extent that it realizes a relationship already inherent 
in life. For the relation of the whole to the part does not entail 
that the part has a meaning for the whole. Here we come upon 
what seems to be an insoluble riddle. We must form the whole 
from the parts, and yet it is the whole that imparts meaning and 
that accordingly assigns the part its place. 
We have already seen that what sets historical inquiry in motion 
is precisely the interdependence of the determinations that pertain 
to some whole and its parts. History is expected to teach what life 
is. And yet history is dependent on life, for history is life coursing 
through time and finds its content there. 
There would be a simple escape from this circle if uncondi-
tioned norms, purposes, or values set the standard for contemplat-
ing and apprehending history. 
History itself produces values whose validity derives from expli-
cating the relationships contained in life. One such is the obliga-
tion that is based on a contract or the recognition of the worth 
and value of every individual regarded as a human being. These 
are universally valid truths because they provide the possibility of 
regulating life at every point of the historical world. 
2. THE STRUCTURE OF EVERY HISTORICAL NEXUS OR SYSTEM 
The problem of history is how is it possible, in a nexus where each 
self is separated from the other and where there is merely a mutual 
exertion of forces, for there to emerge from these individuals a 
subject that acts and suffers like a self? Cultural systems, tendencies, 
movements, and organizations are such commonalities, coherent 
wholes in which particulars cooperate in various ways as parts. 
r. The nature of this cooperation and its various kinds ... 
Their first distinctive feature is that individuals do not enter fully 
263 
into any of these networks, but with only a part of themselves. 
2. Each of them is distinct .... The historical nexus or system 
that is produced through human cooperation differs from the nexus 
of the self by the way in which space and time are manifested. 
Historical systems have space to expand; ever more persons can be 
assimilated in systems of ever-widening scope. Because such sys-
tems can leap over intervening spaces, individuals who are con-
nected in this way can be a long distance from each other. Bridg-
ing intervening spaces, so to speak, individuals can form a system. 4 
Likewise, historical systems extend through long periods of 
• Here Dilthey makes a parenthetical reference to his theory of structure. (H) 
282 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
time, and each such system has much, indeed unlimited, time at its 
disposal. The formative power inherent in time affects historical 
systems imperturbably, but powerfully. 
3. A historical system in which individuals, who have become 
parts of it, cooperate is comparable to a psychic nexus. Here too 
individuals are not given as substances but [as] parts [that] work 
together in accordance with their own distinctive law. And by con-
trast to the inorganic world, this historical system is not merely 
given from without and therefore ultimately mysterious, but it is 
experienced in some way. The manner in which it can be experi-
enced varies considerably. It can produce a consciousness of shar-
ing the same basic attitude with other persons, of having the same 
purpose in common, and of being subordinated to a common 
mode of control; the same consciousness in which individuals cor-
respond with one another is always there. Thus some of the same 
categories that are valid for every psychic nexus recur; for in-
stance, the whole-part relationship. This is the first determination 
of the way in which psychic systems present themselves as histori-
cal. At the same time, we must note a difference that emerges in 
this relationship. 
Every system of this kind has a structure according to which its 
parts form a whole. Yet this structure is different in kind from 
psychic structure. Also there are differences here among historical 
systems that must be noted. 
This provides the justification for the critique of historical rea-
son to transfer the concept of structure to these products. 
Each individual is a single productive force. How do specific 
homogeneous aspects shared by different individuals cooperate to 
264 
become a total force? This relationship presupposes that some 
kind of nexus is constitutive for these homogeneous aspects in in-
dividuals. (See my Introduction to the Human Sciences.) 
4· Insofar as the homogeneous parts draw on those aspects of 
the life of individual persons that are aimed at realizing something 
in the future, the historical system will also realize something that 
lies in the future. The category of purpose can be transferred from 
the single person to a system of this kind, but in a very different, 
transformed sense. 
5. It is still more difficult [to define] in what sense a historical 
system generates value. 
6. Every nexus that is formed in time involves memory of its 
developmental course. Being sequential is the fundamental quality 
of every historical system, and the psychic process involves mem-
ory of its stages to some degree. The category of meaning ... 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
3. THE SUBJECTS OF HISTORICAL ASSERTIONS 
New subjects assume a singular existence. In what sense are such 
subjects to be taken? Where lies the critical justification to treat 
them as the carriers of assertions? 
THE EMERGENCE OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF SYSTEM 
AND COMMUNITY THROUGH HISTORY 
When community becomes rhe subject, then the task is to ascer-
tain what one sees that is new from this perspective on the human 
world. The first thing to ask is, How does such a community be-
come a subject that can act like an individual? 
The past, present cooperation, and the future have to be consid-
ered as contributing to this. 
Here we see how history, the uses of which are so much dis-
cussed, serves the communal life of humanity as the consciousness 
that communities have of their iife-history and as the memory of 
their life span. When we study the history of communities, we 
should ponder the fact that conversely such history as the memory 
of humanity serves to produce community. In turn, communal 
consciousness creates tribal heroes, founders of states and reli-
gions on the basis of a feeling of unity. This is how great. the 
power of our relationship to the past is and how strong the capac-
ity to transfer the unity of our own life-course to the cooperative 
life of individuals in communal forms. 
4· RACE, PEOPLE, ETC. AS CONCRETE-HISTORICAL SUBJECTS 5 
265 
[ ... ] 
5. CULTURAL SYSTEMS 
The circle involved in defining cultural systems. 
Where lies their unity? 
What mode of connectedness lies in these systems? 
What is the relationship between cultural systems and organizations? 
They can only be separated by means of abstraction. 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF SYSTEMATIC ORGANIZATION 
Organizations, no less than singular works, require a rigorous, 
rule-guided interpretation. Such interpretation is not about ex-
5 This is the first of several headings without any accompanying notes. 
266 
284 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
plaining the genesis of such organizations or about deriving the 
causes that produced them. There has been much academic debate 
about whether their explanation is rational, psychological, or his-
torical. To the extent that any of these are possible, they presup-
pose the hermeneutics of particular organizations and the compar-
ison of kindred organizations. [The nature of explanation remains 
for us] a transcendent question. 
A hermeneutics is possible here because a relation exists be-
tween a people and a state, between believers and a church, be-
tween the life of science and a university, that allows a common 
spirit and a uniform way of life to find a structural nexus in which 
they are expressed. Thus there exists here a relationship of parts to 
whole in which the parts receive meaning from the whole and the 
whole receives its sense from the parts; these categories of inter-
pretation have their correlate in the structural nexus of the organi-
zation by which it realizes a purpose teleologically. 
What, however, is specific about the structure of organization 
and the categories of their intelligibility? The mere existence of an 
organization as such has no value. In a structural nexus, "func-
tion" and "contribution" take the place of "purpose." 
6. ECONOMIC LIFE 
[ ... ] 
7· THE LEGAL SYSTEM AND ITS ORGANIZATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY 
[ ... ] 
8. THE ARTICULATION OF SOCIETY 
[ •. 0] 
9· CUSTOM, ETHOS, AND THE IDEALS OF LIFE 
[. . . ] 
10. RELIGION AND ITS ORGANIZATION 
[. . . ] 
RELIGIOSITY 
Among the lived experiences that are important for the objectifica-
tion and organization of the human spirit, religiosity is especially 
central. History shows this, but it is also obvious from anthro-
pological reflection. Here we are at the root where the lived experi-
ence and understanding of poets, artists, religious persons, and 
philosophers come together. In all of them something . . . emerges 
from the experience of life itself, that extends beyond it. The mo-
ment that leads beyond life is always embedded in life itself. The 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
peculiar trait of religiosity is that life as experienced enters into a 
relation with the invisible. The invisible exerts its influence in life 
itself, over it, and within it. This relation sterns from the heightened 
way in which great religious individuals experience life. Religious 
genius is not to be found in the dreams of sentimental souls about 
otherworldliness; rather, life itself experienced according to its true 
nature- full of hardship and a singular blend of suffering and hap-
piness throughout- points to something strange and unfamiliar, as 
if it were corning from invisible sources, something (pressing in) on 
life from outside, yet corning from its own depths. There is no 
artistic embellishment to ease the pressure of life and of reality that 
impinges on every mode of existence for these wholly nonartistic 
natures. Death accompanies every moment of Calvin's life like a 
shadow. Behind the Protestant faith in salvation through divine 
election there always lurks the terrible thought occasioned by the 
gratuitous damnation of other souls. By also making themselves the 
instruments of God, active natures attain an inner peace. The more 
contemplative and peaceful types in the age of the Reformation, 
however, sought another path. And the more resolutely human 
beings live in their own essence and have liberated themselves from 
worldly drives and social entanglements, the more they become 
frightened by the shallowness in each of us. They feel more lonely 
and separated from other human beings. Because they would like to 
overcome their isolation from others, they transport themselves 
toward the invisible and into the fundamental nature of life itself, 
uniting with other souls through love and understanding. 
The decisive thing is always that in the religious genius there be 
no evasion, no yielding to the superficiality of being caught up in 
life, nor to the everyday forgetfulness of past and future. There 
may be no flight of the imagination and no satisfaction in the 
secular exercise of power, which betoken the forgetfulness of death 
and of the salvation of the soul. 
r. Because religious objects are always presupposed by lived ex-
267 
perience, religion [exists] in a network of tradition .... 
2. When this network of tradition is ruptured, then lived experi-
ence and understanding must preserve the meaning of life, the ten-
dency of purposes toward the invisible, and the supplementation 
of values [found in religion]. 
Religion arises from communion with the invisible. But the forms 
of religiosity do not originate from this by itself. Rather, this com-
munion accompanies the person in shaping a satisfying unity (bliss), 
and this is the prime reality, i.e., the aspects of this shaping that is 
lived through in religious experience. These experiences are not 
286 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
just doctrinal nor just emotional, but arise in persons who fulfill 
the task of life in a particular way. Consequently, attempts to 
adopt goals, illusions about the values inherent in them, finding 
new values, and establishing the meaning of life-relationships are 
always involved in a determinate form of a religion. 
Conceptual cognition of religion is quite difficult therefore, be-
cause all the forms of expression and the enduring products in 
which it makes itself available for study, such as dogma, faith, 
superstition, religious art, and religious world-views, must first be 
interpreted to grasp the psychic operations that underlie them. 
I. Anything that objectively contains life and its correlate, the 
world, can be an object that is assigned a religious value. 
2. The assignment of religious value is never a primary act, 
however. Religious value is not a fully independent kind of value 
like a life-value, etc. Instead, it presupposes experiences within the 
evaluation of life, which, on the basis of a certain emotional tonal-
ity or coloring, accentuate the pressure of the surrounding world 
(Pascal), the impossibility of overcoming it, the unreality, fragility, 
corruptibility, and nonintelligibility of the world; in a positive 
way, on the other hand, they accentuate a need for world stability 
and the possibility of trust and peace. All this does not yet consti-
tute a religious frame of mind. For a frame of mind is only reli-
gious when it turns to the invisible for the means to constitute its 
mental world rooted in these feelings. This is how the concept of 
religious need originates, which is really the need that finds satis-
faction in religion. Whenever this need does not precede religion 
or is not a constitutive moment in religious life, religion is merely 
268 
tradition and custom. And every religious being possesses the 
power to use these original conceptions in some manner in the 
mental disposition that influences the evaluation of life. 
I I. ART 
[ ... ] 
I 2. THE SCIENCES 
[ ... ] 
I 3. WORLD-VIEW AND PHILOSOPHY 
[ ... ] 
THE INTERPRETATION OF PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEMS 
r. The simplest case is when there is a main or master text. The 
problem lies in the relationship between its systematic explication, 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
its sense on the basis of the meaning of the parts, and the distinc-
tive value of its truths, etc. Developmental history can help here. 
2. Plato and Leibniz. Because the parts of their writings are not 
all adapted to the whole, a grasp of their sense and their meaning-
relationship to the whole requires a developmental history that 
makes it possible to assess the meaning of particular texts for the 
whole. 
THE HUMAN SCIENCES AND A PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE 
r. The intellect and the drives display a striving that is intrinsic 
to psychic life. The activation of this striving is pleasurable. 
2. The structure of psychic life operates teleologically, i.e., as a 
striving toward further development. 
3. A lasting satisfaction that is independent of individual life can 
only arise when there is a coincidence between individual striving 
and greater objective forces. 
4· This life-nexus is governed by the demands of integrity and 
morality. It consists in the fact that the recognition of a mutual 
sense of obligation makes itself conscious as an ought. Transcen-
dental investigations about an a priori ought are fruitless. 
[[ 
Today philosophical thought hungers and thirsts for life. It wants 
to return to a heightened joy of living, to art, etc. 
THE RELATION OF THE HISTORY OF METAPHYSICS 
AND RELIGION TO CULTURE 
Comparative Science of Culture 
r. A culture has its essential trait in the fact that, supported by 
given organizations, it arrives at a sustained peak in which indi-
269 
vidual systems are connected in a harmonious structure, which 
then disintegrates because of relationships that need to be inves-
tigated. 
When this harmonious structure reaches its apex, content and 
form are inseparable. Life-concepts such as obligation and official 
function, the artistic portrayal of life through proportion, light, 
and shadow, the appreciation of tonal order in melody and in har-
mony, and the tragic relation of character, action, guilt, and fate 
288 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
all involve such formed life contents. A theory of this kind of for-
mation (is needed]. 
The contents of a culture, i.e., its realities or qualities, are grasped 
in life itself according to their meaning. This grasp achieves ex-
pression in art, etc. What is this relation? 
2. At the height of a culture, from which one always must begin 
(this is the most important perspective for a method), a conscious 
attitude arises in which the value, meaning, and a sense of life 
attain a determinate expression on the basis of the structural rela-
tion of the elements of the culture. All this finds its expression as 
anthropological reflection generates poetry, religion, and philoso-
phy. Each of them serves to interrelate our feeling of the present 
with memory and the future. It finds a sense in memory, explicates 
the feeling of life as the feeling of values in the present, and pro-
duces an ideal (the good). The limitation of every culture is such 
that at its height it already demands a [better] future. 
I4. THE SYSTEM OF ORGANIZATIONS IN THE STATE 
[ ... ] 
I 5. NATIONS AS THE CARRIERS OF POWER, CULTURE, ETC. 
[ ... ] 
I 6. HUMANITY AND UNIVERSAL HISTORY 
[ ... ] 
THE INTERACTION OF NATIONS. MOVEMENTS. AGES 
REVOLUTION 
Changes occurring in the historical world can be differentiated ac-
cording to basic types. They can be conceived as occurring in a nar-
row sphere within a cultural system, or simultaneously in a cul-
tural system and the organization of a particular nation, or in a 
more encompassing whole, and in different aspects of its life. They 
can also be noted insofar as the time span that they occupy is 
270 
great or small. These various distinctions are conditioned by the 
nature of the movement that we apprehend. Revolutions spread in 
spheres of varying circumference, and they take different lengths 
of time to be achieved. 
We must take into account the various kinds of such concerted 
change in order to make their spatial and temporal scope intelli-
gible. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
Again it becomes evident that the delineation of a revolution is 
possible only because a unity of meaning connects a series of 
changes. For as such, all changes are causally connected with each 
other in the same way. Causally, the grounding of the German 
Empire and the French Revolution are not demarcated from what 
happened before and after in the corresponding spheres. Again, 
merely on the basis of contents and their purely material relations, 
such a demarcation is not possible. 
I will proceed from systems of change that can readily be desig-
nated as revolutions. Their common characteristic is that a move-
ment that has been suppressed for a long time suddenly shatters 
the given lawful order and extends itself over a wide domain ac-
cording to its inherent force. 
And here we highlight those revolutions in which the interests 
that have been suppressed are joined with a set of ideas that have 
been accumulating a long time and through which these revolu-
tions receive a distinctive kind of meaning. Their effects reach, of 
course, as far as the interests that have been related and linked, 
but beyond that they serve as the realization of many ideas and 
ideals. This is certainly true of the immensely important Reforma-
tion and French Revolution. The ideas that were realized in them 
had a widespread effect wherever related interests lay dormant. 
For this reason, their meaning is not exhausted by their objective 
results within the orbit of interests from which they arose. 
In both cases the outbreak is preceded by a slowly developing 
set of ideas, on the one hand, and a long period of restraints 
within an organization, on the other. The power of this organiza-
tion suppresses the tendencies to change contained within it. In the 
first instance, it is the organization of the church; in the second, 
that of the state. 
When a revolution first breaks out in a culturally developed 
context, it is located in a determinate system and seizes its partici-
pants completely, so that all other interests retreat .... 
THEORY OF HISTORY 
SPIRIT AS THE PRODUCT OF INTERIORIZATlON 
AND ITs OBJECTIFICATION IN HisToRY 
r. Hegel's error [consists] in having constructed the stages of 
spirit immanently, whereas in fact they result from the way that 
271 
290 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
spirit and the historical situation work together. Spirit in its ide-
ational interiorization is already the product of the lawful dy-
namics of the social world. 
2. From this stems the close kinship of the two. 
3. Objectification is the other great problem of history as a sci-
ence. Objectification occurs 
A. in expression as art and literature; 
B. in intellectual re-presentation; 
C. in the organizations where change is made permanent 
and achieves a regulated, ordered; continuous, incessant 
productivity; 
D. in the law. The law represents the sum total of enforce-
able rules by which outward actions are regulated. Ac-
cordingly, it objectifies in itself the conceptualization (I) of 
the values on which a society depends and their relative 
importance in criminal law, etc., and (2) its standard form, 
as conditioned by socio-economic life, etc.; 
E. in the educational system. This mode of objectification 
[assumes] a special place. Here educators and the educa-
tional system use a given ideal of life to bring about a state 
of mind in the young. It does not involve actions, but a 
habitus which is to persist when the education has been 
completed. The ideal of a given time and of a people lives 
in the profession of its educators. This ideal is not capable 
of being explicated rationally. It is only realized through 
the educator's art; and 
F. in ecclesiastical organizations. Whatever has been devel-
oped in communion with the invisible is objectified, i.e., 
religious experience and the dogmas and forms of religious 
communion that arise from it. 
To summarize: Historical research has to explicate, therefore, 
(I) the process of the interiorization of a given historical world on 
the basis of a prior phase and (2) its exteriorization. 
THE DRIVING FORCE IN HISTORY 
We encounter this problem first in Hegel's earliest period, but the 
psychological foundation and development are lacking. The driv-
ing force in history is always something unsatisfactory in a cul-
tural situation. Thus the urge to go beyond it arises. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
UNIVERSAL-HISTORICAL UNDERSTANDING 
Universal-historical understanding presupposes autobiography, bi-
ography, and the history of nations, cultural systems, and organi-
zations. Each of these histories has its own center to which the 
processes are related and consequently the values, purposes, and 
significance that result from this relationship. 
The possibility of approximating objective universal history de-
pends upon the relations of these moments to one another. 
This must be shown first of all from the history of historiogra-
phy, through which history attains conscious reflection upon itself. 
Thucydides [makes] the first stab at universal-historical under-
standing. He regards his object as a productive system in which 
the art of war, internal and external statecraft, culture, politics, 
and constitutional disputes work together to determine power 
in Greece. This corresponds to Eduard Meyer's6 interpretation, 
which, viewing Thucydides as his ideal, retrospectively constructs 
the series of causes that have determined this final state. The prin-
ciple of selection and of formative (direction) lies in the final state, 
and the speeches provide the essential form of motivation at the 
decisively important points, just as monologues do in a great 
drama. Diplomatic missions can also be treated this way. 
The next stage of universal-historical understanding is repre-
sented by Polybius. Here thought about political organization is 
combined with Thucydidean pragmatism. The meaning of histori-
cal moments is determined by how they relate to the political or-
ganization of Rome and how they contribute to the attainment of 
its world dominance. Seldom has a historian been able to give so 
tight a unity of meaning to such a universal subject matter. 
One should not simply extract the universal-historical theory of 
the Middle Ages from Otto von Freising.7 Dante's interpretation 
already goes further when he makes us see its connection with 
Thomas Aquinas. The foundation is the relationship already es-
tablished both in theology and in philosophy between God and 
the purposive system of the world. This is the first time that a 
principle of a universal-historical nexus is explicitly posited, and it 
"Eduard Meyer (r855-I930), German historian; author of Geschichte des Alter-
turns, Agyptische Chronologie, Casars Monarchie, and Ursprung und Anfange des 
Christentums, among others. 
7 Otto von Freising (c. rrrr-58), German bishop, grandson of Emperor Henry 
IV, and historian; author of Historia de duabus civitatibus, a philosophical inter-
pretation of world history. 
272 
292 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
is grasped as a meaningful or purposive system. The Aristotelian 
doctrine about the state as well as doctrines about the Roman 
Empire and the kingdom of God are integrated into this more 
complete and systematic universal nexus. 
273 
With this, universal-historical thought once again enters a higher 
state. [But it is] unfortunate that this theory is founded on a reli-
gious metaphysics and that the cultural systems are subordinated 
to the organizations of the two kingdoms. 
A more wide-ranging summation of historical thinking emerges 
through the gradual development of (a) the theory of constitutions 
and the internal relationship between a constitution and organiza-
tional power (Machiavelli, Guicciardini); (b) the study of purpo-
sive systems (their increasing differentiation and the natural sys-
tem), culture, first as the blossoming of the arts and literature, 
then as the course of religious development, and finally as the 
progress of the sciences and of solidarity; and lastly (c) the devel-
opment of nations as the carriers of history and their relations to 
one another (the Historical School). 
An even higher level summation of historical thinking will re-
quire a grasp of how these moments that have been singled out 
analytically and developed theoretically relate to each other. 
The productive nexus of the coexistence and succession of hu-
man events is not the nexus of universal history. Let us consider an 
example. In the productive nexus of coexistence and succession, 
neither the number nor the goodness of Luther's or Schiller's chil-
dren can be overlooked; and were we to evaluate facts like this for 
each of their lives, then they would have to be acknowledged to 
have considerable worth. 
ADDENDA TO THE HISTORY OF HISTORIOGRAPHY 
{TO BE INSERTED AT SPECIFIC POINTS) 
r. The idea of progress originates in the historical experience 
of scientific progress and ofdominance over nature. This experi-
ence must have occurred for the first time in the age of great dis-
coveries. At one stroke the relationship to antiquity was over-
turned. We advanced beyond antiquity, dwarfing, it seemed, all its 
knowledge. Forms gave way to laws, etc. This historical experi-
ence reached philosophic awareness in Bacon. From the historical 
standpoint, the thinkers of antiquity looked like humanity's imma-
ture children, and contemporaries now become the real adults 
who broaden experience, overcome prejudices, and transform gen-
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
293 
eralizations into laws. The effect of this in different countries ... 
Leibniz ... 
To what extent does this consciousness of scientific progress 
seem to have been assimilated into the general life of the times? 
How much does it alter historical consciousness? Bridges relating 
us to the past are destroyed. Descartes: "Here is my library. " 8 
2. Religious enlightenment represents a further historical experi-
274 
ence of progress, in that the dissolution of the old faith was not 
just a negative experience. Rather, a new positive meaning came to 
be attached to faith, which represented a development of Christianity. 
The first thinker in which this broadening of historical con-
sciousness occurred is Leibniz. His introduction to the Theodicy 
documents this. We find more evidence for this in his correspon-
dence with Bossuet and with other Catholic intellectuals. Leibniz 
declares every resort to the Bible or to Catholic dogma as unsuc-
cessful. As I have shown, the dissolution of the religious dogma of 
justification corresponds to this. [Also] Lessing. 
In addition to progress in the cultural system of the knowledge 
of nature, Leibniz also exposes progress in the cultural system of 
religiosity. It is impossible to see into Leibniz's soul. He never 
reckoned with his own depths. He lived in the law-governed ob-
jective complex of the world. He would have judged his attempts 
to ground dogmas as mere possibilities. What he experienced reli-
giously within himself was a new experience linked with the En-
lightenment. 
Here, however, we arrive at a limit of the times. A free spirit 
who was involved with the tiny states of Hanover and Branden-
burg could not possibly find there, compared with antiquity and 
the remnants of the Roman world-empire before his eyes, the at-
tainment of a higher stage of development. 
Leibniz's feeling of life, as manifested repeatedly both in ran-
dom remarks and in his system, was that to live means to be ac-
tive, to make progress. Happiness is the feeling of making prog-
ress. Hobbes, whom he had studied so thoroughly, had enunciated 
the same principle. It, together with a heightened consciousness of 
a complex, law-governed world, greatly influenced Leibniz. His 
mode of being was to link the two. His consciousness of himself 
x When someone asked Descartes to show him his library, Descartes took him to 
the rear of his dwelling, showed him a calf being dissected, and said: "Voila rna 
bibliotheque." See Adrien Baillet, La vie de Monsieur Descartes (Paris: Daniel 
Horthemels, r69r; Reprint, New York: Garland, r987), 2:273. 
294 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
was of progress and development. But the world itself, this totality 
of monadological developments remained for him something re-
moved from the course of time- a law-governed system in accor-
dance with the metaphysics of the day. 
3· Two events broke the barriers that long prevented the con-
cept of a development that encompasses all domains from crossing 
the portals of historical consciousness. These were the North 
American war of independence _and, two decades later, the French 
Revolution. By realizing ideas in a new, most important domain of 
spirit made up of economics, law, and politics, progress over the 
entire past was achieved. Human beings became conscious of their 
inner productive forces. Natural law was realized in America, and 
275 
the quintessence of modern ideas was realized in the French Revo-
lution. It was demonstrated that the transference from higher ideas 
to the greater forms of life has no limits. 
SchlOzer/ with his contempt of the midget city-states of 
Greece ... 
17. THE NATURE OF SYSTEM. THE GOAL OF THIS BOOK 
THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE NATURAL AND THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
By gathering these determinations of the human sciences, we can 
see the basic difference between the natural sciences and the hu-
man sciences according to their method, their power, and their 
limits. The natural sciences consist throughout of assertions that 
are exact and well-established, and that are related to each other 
in ways to project the whole physical world. Progress in the prin-
ciples of the natural sciences consists in expanding either the scope 
of this world or the universality of our conceptual cognition of it. 
It never lies, however, in correcting the foundation of truths gained 
at the outset by subsequent truths. Rather, initial truths are the 
least hypothetical because they are the most direct expressions of 
the facts. The more that universality expands, the more powerful 
the hypothetical element in it. The principles of the natural sci-
ences always express a state of affairs. 
The natural sciences find their antecedent basis in optical images 
that arise in the senses, and as such are clear and distinct, and in 
the logically verifiable construction of universal representations 
9 August Ludwig von Schlozer (173s-r8o9), historian in Gottingen. See SW 4, 
307. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
295 
from such images. The expression of a universal representation in 
thought is an object. At this point we recognize how closely re-
lated the universal representation and the object of thought are. 
Those who investigate nature take the reality of the object as it is 
given in resistance, etc., without further evidence. If they raise 
themselves to critical consciousness, then the object is designated 
as a phenomenon with reference to its sensible presence, and every 
further derivative retains this phenomenal character. 
Thus the natural task of those who investigate nature is not the 
apprehension of laws. Rather, (a) they must express some limited 
state of affairs such as the orbit of Mars; (b) this very task leads 
them to solve it analytically by apprehending the lawfulness of 
homogeneous phenomena; (c) finally, a synthesis must be attained. 
The human sciences, by contrast . . . 
276 
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE STUDY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
AND THEIR THEORY TO CONTEMPORARY PROBLEMS 
We are no longer approaching life through a system; rather, we 
start by analyzing life. This problem has as its reality the total 
extent of the socio-historical world with the full intensity of an-
thropological knowledge. 
This problem can be juxtaposed with the conceptual cognition 
of the natural sciences. It (the relationship of the natural sciences 
and the human sciences) is neither about different realities nor 
about different methods. 
The philosophical question that arises from both together is, 
What life-attitude capable of being realized in the present do we 
draw from this way of apprehending the truth of life? 
The answer depends upon taking the natural and the human 
sciences together. My book, therefore, cannot refrain from doing 
this if it expects to produce solutions to present-day problems. But 
that only obliges me to discuss this in general terms. This has 
nothing to do with producing a system. 
Every system presupposes the completeness and objectivity of 
logical and epistemological considerations. If only a permutational 
procedure remains possible, as for Leibniz, then system is merely 
hypothetical. 
All of the most recent systems offer merely the scholastic proof 
that a thinker has moved beyond his lived experience to achieve a 
pleasing totality of considerations. Such systems no longer exert 
any influence on life. 
296 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
A Second Projection of a Continuation of the Formation of 
the Historical World in the Human Sciences 
I. THE PROBLEM OF HISTORY 
THE HUMAN BEING AS HISTORICAL 
A. The meaning of the theory of the human sciences is first of all 
to assist us with what we have to do in the world, with what we 
are able to make of ourselves, and with what we can do with the 
world and it with us. 
The answer to these questions presupposes both sciences, i.e., 
natural science creates one world through its categories and hu-
man science another. It is impossible for the human spirit to per-
sist in its duality. Philosophical systems attempt to overcome it in 
vain! In essence [they embody two alternatives]: The first is to 
construct nature as has been done since the time of Descartes and 
to determine the essence of the human spirit from it. Then human 
spirit can only be a functional system or a law-governed nexus of 
2 77 
parts. In both instances a false separation obtains between the 
content and the form of the human spirit. Its contents are the 
accidental aspects that permeate it. Spirit is essentially historical, 
however, i.e., it is filled with the memory of the entire human race 
that lives on in an abbreviated form. Spirit has the capacity to be 
filled with this memory because it was able to produce it from out 
of itself. 
The second alternative is to start from ourselves, and ever since 
Kant, from an ego, etc. Here we also fail to find the historical 
"h 
, b . 
uman 
emg .... 
These philosophical systems are of no use. What we need is to 
grasp the inner relation of these two worlds in ourselves, how we 
adopt changing views on the world. Sometimes we feel ourselves 
to be part of nature- mysterious, instinctive, earthbound; some-
times ... 
The problem of history is the following: How can understand-
ing apprehend historical phenomena? How can the intellect take 
command of this sphere of objects? The relationship is entirely 
different from the conceptual cognition of nature- it involves re-
flexive awareness. The great historical forms of human spirit have 
an abbreviated spiritual presence in us. 
B. How is historical knowledge possible? 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
297 
r. Understanding. The transposition from the subject into the 
object required by understanding ought not to be conceived simply 
as attributing inner life to what is given on the basis of similarity. 
2. The fundamental problem is (a) what has a spiritual presence 
in us is like the abbreviation of contents ... that have their full 
reality in history itself; there they possess their proper magnitude; 
however, the problem goes deeper, and (b) no matter what their 
genesis, historical and social categories are at work in the life of 
the subject, i.e., reciprocal obligation, duty, law, and organization. 
These categories have contents that alone give them existence. The 
requirement that forms not be separated from contents is fulfilled 
here. This completely false juxtaposition has been overcome. These 
categories, forms, concepts are realized in the objective world of 
history at large. 
Starting point: The historical world is always there, and the in-
dividual does not merely contemplate it from without but is inter-
twined with it.
10 It is impossible to sever these relations between 
the individual and history. To do so would leave merely an incom-
prehensible condition from which to derive the historical process, 
that is, a conjunction of conditions with what is given at all times 
while abstracting from the actual course of history. It is the same 
irresolvable problem as examining the possibility of conceptual 
cognition prior to or independently of cognizing as such. We are 
278 
historical beings before being observers of history, and only be-
cause we are the former do we become the latter. 
Objective spirit: All the human sciences rely on the study of 
history from what has already run its course up to what exists in 
the present as the limit of what is available in our experience about 
humanity. This includes what has been experienced, understood, 
and what it has been possible to raise to consciousness from the 
past. In all this we are seeking for human beings; psychology too 
is only a search for the human being in lived experience and un-
derstanding, in the expressions and effects that have been pro-
duced by them. For this reason I have designated the basic task of 
all reflection about the human sciences as a critique of historical 
reason.'' The problem that needs to be solved for historical reason 
was not fully addressed by the Kantian critique of reason. Kant 
initially specified the problem of critique with reference to Aris-
totle, i.e., conceptual cognition is fulfilled in a judgment .... 
10 See the main principles of the Introduction to the Human Sciences. (D) 
"See also above, GS VII, 117 [this volume, 139]. (H) 
279 
298 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
We must leave the pure and refined air of Kant's critique of pure 
reason to do justice to the completely different nature of historical 
objects. The following questions emerge: I experience my own 
states myself and I am interwoven in the interactions of society as 
the point of intersection of the different social systems. These sys-
tems derive from the very same human nature that I experience in 
myself and understand in others. 12 The language in which I think 
originated in time and my concepts developed temporally as well. 
Thus, as far as I can plumb my own depths, I am a historical 
being. The first significant result for solving the problem of the 
conceptual cognition of history emerges here: The primary condi-
tion for the possibility of historical science is contained in the fact 
that I am myself a historical being and that the one who investi-
gates history is the same as the one who makes history. Universally 
valid synthetic historical judgments are possible. The principles of 
historical science cannot be formulated in abstract propositions 
expressing equivalences. For they must, in accordance with the 
nature of their object, be based on relationships grounded in lived 
experience. Lived experience contains the totality of our being. It 
is this that we re-create in understanding. Here we first find the 
principle of the mutual affinity of individuals. 
THE HISTORICAL CONCEPT 
Human beings recognize themselves only in history, not through 
introspection. Basically, we all search for the human being in his-
tory; but more broacily, we look to history for what makes us 
human and religious, etc. We want to know what "the human" is. 
If there were a science of the human being, it would be anthropol-
ogy, which aims at understanding the totality of lived experiences 
according to their structural nexus. The individual never realizes 
more than a possibility of his or her development, which could 
always have taken a different direction from what was decided 
upon. The human being is there for us only under the condition of 
realized possibilities. In cultural systems too we search for a struc-
ture that has been determined anthropologically and in which 
some x is realized. We call this an "essence," but that is only a 
term for a procedure that forms a conceptual nexus in this do-
main. We do not exhaust all possibilities of human nature by this 
either. 
12 See Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW r, 87-91. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
299 
The horizon widens. Even if the historian has before him a lim-
ited subject matter, a thousand threads lead on and on into the 
boundlessness of all the memories of the human race. Historiogra-
phy begins retracing its steps from the present and from one's par-
ticular homeland by an exposition of what still survives in human 
memory in the proper sense. Alternatively, annals record what has 
just occurred as the years progress. As history advances, the hori-
zon goes beyond one's own state, and more and more of the past 
appears in the underworld of memory. After life itself vanishes, 
only expressions remain: direct expressions in which souls have 
expressed what they were and also narratives describing the ac-
tions and circumstances of individuals, communities, and states. 
And the historian stands amidst the ruins of the remnants of things 
past, of what souls manifested in deeds, words, sounds, and im-
ages- souls who have long ceased to exist. How should the histo-
rian conjure up their spirits? His whole effort to recall them is an 
interpretation of the remnants that have been left behind. Imagine 
someone who lacks any memory of his own past but is always 
thinking or acting only on the basis of how this past influenced 
him without being conscious of any of its parts. This would be the 
state of nations, communities, and of humanity itself if it were not 
possible to complete the remains, interpret expressions, and place 
28o 
the narration of isolated deeds back into the nexus from which 
they arose. All this is interpretation, a hermeneutical art. 
The problem is, What form does interpretation adopt when it is 
wholly freed from individual existence and when we affirm propo-
sitions about subjects that in some sense or other are systems of 
persons, i.e., cultural systems, nations, or states? 
When we do not find our measure in the life-unity of the per-
son, then our first concern becomes a method of finding stable 
demarcations within the unbounded interchange between individ-
ual existence. It is like drawing lines and sketching figures that can 
endure within a never-ending current. It seems impossible to estab-
lish a comprehensible relationship between this reality and the in-
tellect; for the concept separates out what is linked in the flow of 
life and re-presents something that is universally and eternally 
valid apart from the person who formulates it. But the stream of 
life is unique throughout; each wave in it rises and disappears. 
This difficulty has been the distinctive problem of historical method 
since Hegel first juxtaposed the Enlightenment ideal of intellectual 
cognition to the essence of the human-historical world. This prob-
lem can be solved without renouncing concepts and taking refuge 
300 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
in intuition; however, we will need to transform our historical and 
psychological concepts. Fichte had the intuitive genius to form 
such concepts for psychic life and spirit in general. Among these, 
the concept of energy took the place of substance; the activities 
that emerge in spirit exist both in relation to previous activities 
and in contrast to those that occur simultaneously; and thus a 
progression occurs whereby what differentiates itself in time can 
be unified in a productive energy. But Fichte contributed merely a 
schema of psychic dynamism; its application remained wedded to 
Kantian concepts instead of to reality. Neither Herbart nor Hegel 
reached the open air of the actual historical world. Nevertheless, it 
was the beginning of a total revolution of our overall conception 
of the historical world closely related to the birth of modern histo-
riography. This link was exhibited most prominently through Ro-
manticism with Niebuhr and then later through Hegel with Ranke. 
We must liberate ourselves, however, from the conceptuaLchaos of 
that era produced by its antithesis of historical reality and concep-
tual cognition in accordance with the principle of identity. Instead, 
we will focus on the nature of historical concepts themselves. As-
sertions using historical concepts are logically independent from 
281 
the subject in which they originate (and) from the moment in 
which they are formed; accordingly, their validity is independent of 
psychological place and time. Their content, however, is a happen-
ing, some kind of passage. The assertion is independent of time, but 
what is asserted is a temporal passage. To be sure, not all historical 
concepts have been formed properly according to this viewpoint; 
only insofar as they are properly formed should they occupy a place 
in our conception of the historical world. At the same time, how-
ever, available concepts must be transformed in many ways so that 
what is changeable and dynamic in them is brought out. 
At root the problem is similar to the way higher mathematics 
seeks to rule over changes in nature. No part of history, an age, 
for instance, can be grasped by concepts that express something 
fixed in it, e.g., a system that relates fixed qualities. In the age of 
Enlightenment, 
13 such concepts were "autocracy" for the state and 
"enlightenment" for spiritual life. These concepts do not grasp the 
distinctive nature of the age at all, which really involves a system 
of relations whose parts are dynamic and whose interactions ex-
13 See above, GS VII, 178-87 [this volume, 197-208] (H). 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
301 
hibit constant qualitative changes. In fact, the very relations them-
selves change because they depend on interacting forces, meaning 
that each of them contains within it a rule of change. Applying 
this to the period of the Enlightenment, the social order that ex-
isted until the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the seven-
teenth centuries becomes untenable, because conflicts between the 
special interests of aristocracy, the estates, government, and then 
of the provinces between themselves and in relation to the whole 
did not allow a stable unity of political will, a general concern for 
the whole, and a steady pursuit of the ends of a state to arise in 
Germany. The same political insufficiencies were evident in En-
gland, France, and Italy at other times. They created unbearable 
conditions in foreign relations because the striving after power be-
tween these competing states manifested itself in a different way 
than in any earlier era. These states arose side by side, their overall 
form depending primarily on inheritance and war. They were not 
yet united by a coherent literature or by a common language de-
riving from it. Dante was the first to achieve this for the Italians. 
With it arose the striving for national unity, but this met with no 
possibility of being satisfied in the politics of conflict of tyrants 
and republics given the distribution of powers. In England things 
282 
proceeded differently because there was a unified literature ... 
also in France. What was decisive for Germany was that great 
states such as the Spanish world monarchy and the power of France 
exerted a terrible pressure on a country that was the last to ac-
knowledge the mission uniting itself .... 
The question now is, How can such a nexus or system that is 
not as such produced by one mind, nor directly experienced, nor 
capable of being traced back to the lived experience of one person 
be formed by the historian from its expressions and from asser-
tions about them? This presupposes that logical subjects can be 
constituted that are not psychological. There must be a means of 
delimiting such subjects and a justification for apprehending them 
as units or as a nexus. 
We seek something soul-like. This is where we have arrived af-
ter a long development of historiography. And here the great prob-
lem arises; certainly all interaction is between psychic life-units, 
but how do we find souls where the individual soul no longer 
rules? The most fundamental starting point is life and what pro-
ceeds from it, the achievement of vitality, which is like the melody 
of psychic life in dissolving the rigidity of rules. 
302 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
We see a first transition in the eighteenth century from the life 
of the soul to psychology. 
2. NATIONS 
NATIONAL HISTORY 
Here the subject who experiences a unity, a meaning of outer 
events- as significant or valuable for something inner- or a pur-
pose is not there in the same manner as the individual; and the 
subject who experiences is not the same as the one who observes. 
Rather, the individual stands over against the people as a spectator 
even when he belongs to it. Thereby understanding, through its 
own categories, is transformed. 
The question is how to delimit the reality of a subject like a 
people or a nation. This is a question that is totally different from 
how the subject is experienced by itself, and can be explained only 
to the extent that the concepts themselves and their delimitations 
are historically relative. The unity of the subject "people" is quite 
variable according to the elements that constitute it. When did 
German national unity first develop, as it was then politically con-
283 
stituted under Ludwig, the German? 14 In the Middle Ages, unity 
of language was only relative due to the various dialects of differ-
ent regions. By the term "nation" we understand a stable socio-
economic and political combination of parts. 
What is in question is the relation of the unity of the subject 
that is based on real elements to the consciousness of belonging 
together, national consciousness, and national feeling as the basis 
for the unity of a [higher] subject.
15 
This consciousness of belonging together depends on the same 
elements that become evident in the individual's consciousness of 
himself. 
Some lived experiences are felt to concern or affect everyone. 
This is also the case within a purposive system, e.g., a religious 
organization. This communal feeling, however, exists only in a 
specific class of lived experiences. In a nation, all kinds of com-
mon experiences refer explicitly to the national community. This 
14 Louis II (c. 804-76), grandson of Charlemagne. The Treaty of Verdun (843) 
allowed him to become king of all Germany east of the Rhine; commonly regarded 
as founder of the German kingdom. 
11 Dilthey notes in the margin of his manuscript: See Lamprecht, Einleitung zur 
deutschen Geschichte, Lazarus, Volkerpsychologie, Lindner und Wundt. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
community refers to all the facets of life of the individuals who 
belong to it. The result is that with every intense experience, the 
community undergoes a change of values. The same consciousness 
of belonging together also manifests itself in the recognition of 
purposes that belong to this nation-system. All these individuals 
who pursue their own purposes, each for themselves, often in 
competition with others, or with the purposes of the family or of 
other groups, find at the same time a domain with its own ends in 
the nation. In this domain they act as a single subject. By being 
conscious of belonging together, they fulfill the purpose that the 
nation-system prescribes for them. Indeed, this whole produces a 
consciousness of what is the highest good for it at that time. This 
takes place under the influence of a communal mood or under the 
leadership of a great man, as in Luther's or Bismarck's day. Then 
setting a common purpose produces the feeling of solidarity. Outer 
events, destinies, and acts are measured by the purpose that is 
central to the life of the nation at the time. Since no nation takes 
its own death into account, plans and purposes have a completely 
different role here than in the individual's life. They continually 
have only a temporal and relative relationship to the inner disposi-
tion of the nation, which is capable of unlimited possibilities. 
Yet every national configuration is also transitory. The replace-
ment of a determinate trajectory by its opposite is possible at any 
time because of a consciousness of insufficiencies. 
Thus the concept of "development" at the national level also 
284 
obtains a much more encompassing, though less determinate, sense. 
The lawlike order that anthropology associates with the relation 
of passion, illusion, reason, idea, or self-control disappears 
completely. Each generation forgets the experiences of the one be-
fore it. 
These facts suffice to draw at least one crucial consequence. Phi-
losophers mull over the question whether the end of every individ-
ual person lies in himself and whether the value of life will always 
be realized in the individual person. This way of stating the ques-
tion transgresses the limits of all experience and passes over into 
an empty metaphysics of history; neither that contention nor its 
opposite, that there is a definable developmental goal for all na-
tions and humanity, has any scientific merit. This is precisely my 
reason for rejecting the philosophy of history. Communal lived 
experiences of a nation, communal goals, and memories are real. 
They constitute a purposive demeanor of individuals, etc., in which 
304 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
they are determined by a mode of solidarity. It is a truism that all 
this transpires in individuals. It is equally obvious that only indi-
viduals can take satisfaction in realized goals and have the con-
sciousness of the commonality of a lived experience; only they can 
support and be filled with common memories. Yet it does not fol-
low from this that what happens in individuals occurs solely for 
their satisfaction. Rather, an individual desires national purposes 
as his own, experiences national experiences as his, recognizes 
memories of such experiences as belonging to him by being filled 
and sustained by them. We cannot go behind this reality, which 
consists precisely in the consciousness of value, meaning, purpose, 
and good by problematic psychological reasoning. We are no more 
privy to the reality of how we happen to discover the meaning of 
life in shared experiences than to how our life-course brings about 
meaning. To be taken up with endless conjectures about this con-
stitutes one of the many ways that explanative psychology trans-
gresses human limits. These transgressions are comparable to ef-
forts to derive hypotheses from the paucity of one's own religious 
experience and reduce it to a mode of self-interest and self-indul-
gence instead of describing religious experience as manifested in 
history. 
28 5 
Equally unacceptable transgressions occur whenever we form 
positive hypotheses relating individual consciousness to some sup-
posed higher, real unity, whether this unity is defined in terms of 
the psychology of a people or some other transcendent way. These 
hypotheses are every bit as inadmissible as those that assert that a 
divinity is really active within individual consciousness. 
The inference that there is a superempirical subject, manifesting 
itself in individual consciousness, based on the facts of a con-
sciousness of solidarity and a universal validity of thought and 
obligation, indicates the turning point from Kantian speculation to 
the transcendental constructive method. The latter takes the facts 
of connectedness and togetherness, of the interchangeability of the 
location of concepts, and of attachments based on obligation and 
grounds them in a real nexus, which explains the foregoing rela-
tions. The creation of this transcendental method spells the death 
of history, because it excludes the use of fruitful, historical con-
cepts to delve into the aforementioned relations. It is an equally 
unacceptable transgression to ground historical kinds of belonging 
together in subjects that are real in some sense, over and above the 
subjects of individual psychology, instead of making them logical 
subjects that support predicates. Herbart, the first person to con-
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
ceive of investigating law-governed relationships in commumttes 
that were distinct from those in the individual psyche, was far 
from assuming such a real subject. 
OF GERMAN SPIRIT 
r. Politically, [German spirit] is connected with the Middle Ages 
through Luther. Duties of office, calling, and occupational hier-
archies in the city and in the country ... compare with Frederick 
the Great and contrast with France and Italy and their Roman 
notion of governance: the polis and the dominant citizens as a 
governing body. 
2. Especially in Protestant Germany, there developed a con-
sciousness of calling, obligation, and objective mission. Every offi-
cial, whether working for an industrial enterprise or for the rail-
ways, carried out an objectively defined duty. This was the beginning 
of administrative hierarchy. The cities also fit into this system. 
Herein resides the true power of the German spirit. Here too Lu-
ther is a carrier of tradition. 
Contrast: corporate bodies associated with communes, parlia-
ments as independent entities, financiers and their functionaries, 
but all under the concept of royal sovereignty. 
3· [Germanic] art on the basis of productive force rather than 
286 
beauty; the coherence and self-sufficiency of artistic forms; music 
that plumbs the depths; thinking on the basis of totality. 
Contrast with the rational spirit of the French. It finds brilliant 
expression in the fifteenth century, while in Germany the bour-
geois life-philosophy is unable to assert itself. Major counter ten-
dencies, among which Jansenism most closely approximates the 
German spirit .... 
4· From Luther and Zwingli ... a line to the attainment of a 
unified personality. (Diderot as a French type.) The formation of 
our spiritual life today still leads back to Lutheranism. 
3· AGES 
The problem we confront now is what order of categories makes 
possible the conceptual cognition of a large historical span? Which 
concepts emerge in these new objects, and to what extent do such 
concepts as value, meaning, and purpose, which have been devel-
oped for individuals, have a directive function here? In a word, 
how can we approximate objective cognition in this broadened 
306 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
domain where the subjects of judgments are no longer individual 
persons? 
1. These newly emerging subjects of propositions express a real-
ity. The method of their delineation on the basis of the human 
sciences .... Other kinds of subjects: movements, ages. 
2. The concept of structure; the structure of a historical epoch, 
for example, the Germans before the migration of nations. 16 
I am searching for access to the complex phenomenon of the 
German Enlightenment. . . . 
No age is easy to grasp. The method is always to create con-
cepts that exhibit the distinctive nature of the times. Each such 
concept should span a whole series of facts, and none of them may 
be in conflict with it. If such concepts encompass the totality of an 
age, we call them historical categories. They are related to one 
another within the narrow scope of this time as the universal cate-
gories of life relate to life always and everywhere. They constitute 
a system that expresses the life-nexus itself. They are the product 
of intuition. 
One of the most difficult problems is to understand the ways in 
which the moods of a nation condition and supplement each other. 
In the sixteenth century, for example, we find realism, satire, the 
grotesque, and intensity of the imagination, and in the seventeenth 
century, realism, the tragic sense of life, criticism, and satire. 
4· PROGRESS 
Whenever we speak of history, the presupposition of understand-
ing is that historical moments have a meaning and the historical 
process a sense. According to this presupposition, even if the pur-
pose of an individual's life lies in his own existence, there is at the 
same time in history a progression of individual happiness and the 
extension of happiness to many individuals. This is on the whole 
the conception of modern English historians. But this conception 
points beyond itself. If the enhancement of individual life from 
generation to generation is also conceived as the mechanical effect, 
as it were, of an accumulation of values, this posits a productivity 
that is disposed toward enhancement. And then there is in history 
an active relationship according to which its course makes sense; 
such "sense" indicates solely the presupposition under which the 
1
" See above, GS VII, 174f. [this volume, 19 5-96]. (H) 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
historical process can be understood but no affirmation about a 
productive force that can be distinguished from the efficacy of his-
tory itself and which could confer on the singular parts of the 
process their meaning as something immanent to this process. 
Here lies merely the condition under which history can be un-
derstood, and its product and result is universal history. But uni-
versal history does not involve a further presupposition of some 
underlying agency in history as its immanent and real condition, 
which can then be explicated in a philosophy of history as provi-
dence or immanent purpose or historical formative force. 
5. THE NEXUS OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY 
A. THE PATH FROM FACTICITY TO THE IDEAL BY WHICH 
WHAT HAPPENS OBTAINS COHERENCE 
Each age exhibits a distinctive structure. The Middle Ages ... in-
volve a system of kindred ideas prevailing in various spheres. The 
ideas of loyalty in feudalism and of the imitation of Christ as obe-
dience: their central content is the superiority of spirit over nature 
on the basis of the fact of self-denial. In science there is the idea of 
a teleological hierarchy. But it must be acknowledged that the 
background of these ideas is a kind of a raw power that cannot be 
overcome by this higher world. 
And this is always the case. The facticity of race, of space, and 
of power-relations provides a matrix that can never be spiritu-
288 
alized. It is Hegel's dream that each age re-presents a stage in the 
development of reason. But to portray an age presupposes a clear 
awareness of the just mentioned facticity. 
There is an inner nexus that leads from the conditioning rela-
tions, the facticities, and the strife of powers to the development 
of ideals, etc. 
r. Every given situation in the infinite series conditions a change 
because the needs that provoke available energies into activity can 
never be satisfied; a hunger for every sort of satisfaction can never 
be sated. 
2. Each configuration of historical life is finite and contains, 
accordingly, a distribution of joyous forces and constraints, an ex-
pansiveness of existence as well as a constrictedness of life, satis-
faction, and privation. This then provokes tensions and new distri-
butions among forces; thus actions constantly arise. 
308 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
In summary, only at very few points of historical life is there any 
temporary repose. Its causes vary: equilibrium, countervailing pro-
ductive forces, etc. History is movement. 
3. There is also a happiness in making progress; tension is alle-
viated and ideals are realized, etc. 
Between dead factical necessities and the loftiest spiritual life 
there lies the continual further development of organizations, in-
stitutions, and the regulated application of force. The intellect cre-
ates mechanisms, as it were, that are used to satisfy needs. It con-
tinually perfects them. The purpose set by the intellect produces 
these mechanisms. Railroads are as much examples of such mech-
anisms as armies, and factories as much as the improvements of 
constitutions. They cGnstitute the proper domain of an intellect 
that seeks the means to attain ends and calculates effects causally. 
And here a combination manifests itself that quite properly re-
veals the nature of history. Its ground is irrational facticity, from 
which stems, on the one hand, the distribution of tension and 
mechanisms and, on the other hand, the differentiation of nations, 
mores, thought, and individuals on which the proper spiritual his-
tory is then based. 
B. REALITY, VALUES, AND CULTURE 
Events are meaningful to the extent that they are referred to a 
nexus or system for which they are that. If I form a concept of 
"value-system," which being superindividual is transcendentally 
289 
grounded- for every determination that has its basis in something 
superindividual is "transcendental" -then the question is merely 
whether the procedure is possible, even if mere formal uncondi-
tional points of reference for the empirical were intended. If one 
eliminates the foundation provided by transcendental philosophy, 
then there is no method to establish unconditional norms, values, 
or purposes. Then there will only be norms, values, and purposes 
that claim unconditional validity but are saddled with relativity 
due to their origin. 
We do indeed measure meaning by some real or ideal system 
relative to which a human being or event acquires this characteris-
tic. If I focus on this characteristic in a productive system, as Edu-
ard Meyer does, and assess it relative to the present, then I first 
must have a standard that determines what has meaning in the 
present, since otherwise everything would be meaningful that had 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
a causal impact on the infinite series of actual states. And one 
thing at least is clear: I find those aspects of the present meaning-
ful that can bear fruit for the future, or for my action in relation 
to it, and for the progress of society toward it. 
And from a practical standpoint, I see most clearly that I must 
begin from universally valid judgments about what is to be real-
ized, if I expect to regulate the future. The present does not con-
tain states, but processes and productive systems that go over into 
the future of something capable of being produced. Bismarck's 
statement that his religion and his state put him in a position in 
which service to the state was more important than all other cul-
tural tasks had a universal validity for him because it was based 
on religion. From this it follows that we have to assume this same 
relationship retrospectively. Universal norms, values, and purposes 
develop in an age, and it is with reference to them that the mean-
ing of actions is to be grasped at first. We can then distinguish 
whether these have been established within limits or uncondi-
tionally. It appears that even within a single nation, there will be 
conflicts about values. 
In this way we arrive, at a deeper level, at the proposition that 
the development of these ideas moves in antitheses (Kant, Hegel) 
that are embodied in the course of the formation of institutions, 
etc., are then formulated and allowed to interact to make ever 
broader and freer positions possible. At first there are no values 
that are valid for all nations. In the Roman Empire, an aristocratic 
comprehension of mankind emerged as the vehicle of humanitas. 
In Christianity, humanity is similarly the subject of value. A trans-
290 
formation [occurred] in the Enlightenment. History itself is the 
productive force in generating value-determinations, ideals, and 
purposes by which the meaning of human beings and events is 
appraised. 
In this generative process, [there can be] a twofold reference 
either to an epoch or to the progress of humanity. 
C. THE PROBLEM OF VALUE IN HISTORY 
It is said that this leads merely to a consciousness of relativity in 
history. Without a doubt, every historical phenomenon is relative, 
since it is finite. But the relation of the finite to the absolute al-
ready contains [the relation] .... 
To put it another way: Does what has been expressed in histori-
3 IO 
PLAN FOR CONTINUATION OF THE FORMATION 
cal categories exist only as a moment of the historical process? Or 
again: Does what is valuable, etc., exist in history only to the ex-
tent that it arises, acts, and perishes in this nexus? 
Can values be established independently from the historical pro-
cess itself? 
The ultimate problem for a critique of historical reason as sketched 
here must now be faced. Everywhere in history there is already 
formation and selectivity in the search for an inner nexus. Every-
where there is a progression according to the relations of finitude, 
pain, force, antithesis, and accumulation that connect one part of 
history to the others. Productive force, value, meaning, and pur-
pose are the joints that underpin the historical nexus. But do we 
find the last word of the historian in the way that nexus, value, 
meaning, and purpose are given in experience? 
The following propositions determine the path I have chosen: 
r. The concept of value arises from life. 
2. The measure for every judgment, etc., is given in the relative 
concepts of value, meaning, and purpose of a nation and epoch. 
3· The task is to describe how these concepts have expanded 
into something absolute. 
4· In summary, this means the full acknowledgment that even 
values and norms that present themselves as unconditional are im-
manent in historical consciousness. 
6. CONCLUSION OF THIS WORK 
The historical consciousness of the finitude of every historical phe-
nomenon and of every human or social state, and of the relativity 
of every kind of faith, is the final step toward the liberation of 
291 
human beings. With historical consciousness human beings attain 
the sovereignty to enjoy every experience to the full, to surrender 
themselves to it completely and unencumbered, as if there were no 
system of philosophy or faith that could bind them. Life is freed 
from conceptual cognition, and spirit rises above all the cobwebs 
of dogmatic thought. When everything beautiful, everything holy, 
every sacrifice is re-experienced and interpreted, they open up per-
spectives that disclose a reality. And in the same way we accept 
what is evil, frightful, and ugly as having a place in the world, as 
containing some reality that must be justified in the world system 
and cannot be wished away. Over against relativity, the continuity 
of creative force asserts itself as the core historical fact. 
DRAFTS FOR A CRITIQUE 
311 
Lived experience, understanding, poetry, and history give rise to 
a view of life that is always there in and with them. Reflection 
merely raises it to analytical clarity and distinctness. The teleologi-
cal consideration of the world and of life is recognized as a meta-
physics that is based on a one-sided, partial, but not contingent 
view of life. The doctrine of an objective value of life is a meta-
physics that surpasses what can be experienced. We do experience, 
however, a connectedness of life and of history in which every part 
has a meaning. Like the letters of a word, life and history have a 
sense. There are syntactical moments of life and history that are 
like particles or conjugations, and they have a meaning, which is 
sought by every kind of human being. Previously, life used to be 
conceived on the basis of the world. But the only route possible is 
to proceed from the interpretation of life to the world. And life is 
there only in lived experience, understanding, and historical com-
prehension. We do not transport any sense of the world into life. 
We are open to the possibility that sense and meaning arise first in 
human beings and their history. It arises, however, in historical 
rather than isolated human beings. For human beings are histori-
cal beings. 
BlANK PAGE 
PART IV 
APPENDIX 
TRANSLATED BY 
RUDOLF A. MAKKREEL AND WILLIAM H. OMAN 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES ON THE 
FOUNDATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
ON THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 
I. The Task 
The purpose of the following analysis of logical operations is de-
limited by the task of the foundation of the human sciences. The 
analysis intends to answer the question whether objectively neces-
sary knowledge in the defined sense is possible. All conceptual 
cognition of reality is based upon consciousness of the reality of 
self-perception and on the attribution of reality to the objects that 
appear in sense perception. But since the sequence of <sense) per-
ceptions straight away forces us to distinguish particular images 
from the objects to which they are related, it becomes necessary to 
add the condition that they are subject to construal. A naive faith 
in the senses is already obliged to factor in the relation of images 
to the sense organs and to a condition that limits perception to 
these images. This makes comprehensible the necessity involved in 
relations between images, and enables us to construct how they 
succeed each other and coexist. Physics and physiology then take 
this condition, which is independent of us, to construct a law-
governed order of phenomena that derives from the succession 
and coexistence of images. The natural sciences, like the historical 
sciences, make two presuppositions. They insist on a moment of 
givenness intrinsic to all sense perceptions because they assume 
there to be a condition that is independent of the experiences of 
any single empirical consciousness. They also presuppose that in-
sofar as our thought proceeds according to the forms and rules 
that bind the consciousness of evidence, it will lead to a knowl-
edge that will enable us to recognize the lawful character of what 
is independent of us. As long as natural scientists or historians 
adopt this standpoint and do not advance to any critical inter-
pretation of knowledge as a system of propositions about the con-
tents immanent to consciousness and their relations, two questions 
arise. Can the presupposition of something transcending the em-
pirical subject be justified? And if so, what is the basis for the fact 
2 95 
APPENDIX 
that the operations of our thought are able to grasp this reality 
independent of us? This second question also arises in the same 
way in relation to the operations of thought that connect self-
296 
perceptions to form conceptual cognitions. The following analysis 
of the lawfulness of our thinking will attempt to solve this prob-
lem. The method by which I seek to solve it is that of comparing 
thought-processes in the different areas of the conceptual cogni-
tion of reality, the determinations of value, and the establishment 
of rules. The primary logical operations that appear in these differ-
ent areas of knowledge prove to be the same ones that are also 
operative when sense perceptions come about. They lie beyond the 
reach of discursive thought. These primary logical operations pre-
suppose the referential nature of thought, but their special quality 
is merely to raise the relationships of the given to consciousness. 
The forms and laws of discursive thought can then be derived 
from them. The problem of how conceptual cognition of reality is 
possible through the medium of thought is thereby related back to 
the different and primary problem about our justification for de-
riving the characteristic of givenness in our conceptual cognition 
of reality from a condition that is distinct from the individual sub-
ject of perception and of thought. 
2 
The three kinds of mental attitude related to the sphere of concep-
tual cognition, the sphere of feeling and instinct, and the volitional 
sphere correspond to different classes of knowledge. 
First, let us make use of a result of the phenomenology of knowl-
edge. There are three different attitudes of psychic life that are the 
basis of the system of conceptual cognition of reality, the system of 
our value-assessments, and that of establishing rules. All three atti-
tudes have their direct expression in language.' Thus a felt or emo-
tional attitude is expressed in an exclamatory sentence and a voli-
tional attitude in an imperative. Further, it is also self-evident that 
the attitude involved in feeling and in volition no less than that in 
objective perception can become the object of a judgment that has 
this state as its object. This occurs when the state is related to the 
subject in which it takes place. Thus a judgment arises in which a 
1 Reference in the margin to Christoph Sigwart (r830-I904), German philoso-
pher and logician, and to Karl Otto Erdmann's Logik, p. 276, about subjectively 
valid judgments. (H) 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
317 
self-perception is objectified. And this is the case no matter whether 
the self-perception is related to a state of the intellectual, emo-
tional, or volitional sphere. Now the proposition that I will act 
according to my convictions is not a judgment. But the state of 
such an inner volitional determination can attain expression in a 
judgment of inner perception. It is another matter, however, when 
the process as such does not become an object for a perceptual 
judgment, but when what is distinctive in a felt or volitional atti-
tude finds its way into speech. Here universally valid knowledge is 
possible only if the (references contained) in both felt and voli-
297 
tional attitudes are expressed universally and are traced back to 
legitimate grounds. For the single felt state adheres to the individ-
uality of the subject, whose judgment has no validity for others. It 
is not transferable. The content of a decision or a command is 
likewise nontransferable. The person to whom a command applies 
neither ought to nor can renew this content in himself; rather, the 
volitional relationship of two persons contained in the command 
just makes it possible for the command to be followed. Only when 
the relationships contained in the felt and volitional attitudes are 
expressed universally can they become objects of universally valid 
knowledge. In the volitional sphere, knowledge divides into two 
classes in accordance with the special nature of willing. To will is 
either to set a purpose by which the subject determines itself or it 
is directed toward the determination of others. Thus on the one 
hand, the concept of purpose or good arises, and, on the other, the 
concept of a regulation, rule, or norm. Just as a felt attitude deter-
mines and exerts an influence on willing, the establishing of values 
is presupposed by the setting of purposes. We do not mean this in 
the sense that values as such are transformed into purposes or 
goods in the volitional sphere. Rather, the nature of willing asserts 
itself independently in the formation of the theory of goods. A 
value is for me that which I have experienced through feeling or 
can re-experience as valuable. A good, in the strict sense, is only 
that which my will can posit as a purpose, and it must be attain-
able. The purposiveness contained in a good must be consistent 
with other more important purposes for me in the nexus of life. 
Therefore, willing has as its relatively independent content the 
positing of a purpose or good and of a rule or norm. When the 
individual and nontransferable relation posited in a feeling or in 
willing is raised to universality, then assertions become possible 
that have as their object the nature of the attitude involved in 
feeling, setting a purpose, or a rule. They do not signify that some-
APPENDIX 
thing takes place, and they assert neither the reality of the process 
in which something is felt or willed, nor the existence of values or 
value-relationships, of purposes or prescriptions. These assertions 
express the relation between values that is rooted in an evaluation, 
the hierarchy of goods that is determined by the setting of a pur-
pose, and the obligation that is posited in a rule or a norm. Wher-
ever the universal validity of a value is formulated or values are 
assessed relative to each other, such assertions emerge or they ex-
press how a sphere of subjects is constrained by a universally de-
scribable mode of operation. 
298 
The following basic forms of assertion and of knowledge emerge. 
[Firstly,] the conceptual cognition of what is the case or cognition 
as such, if the term is taken in its original sense, always has the 
given as its object and seeks to ascertain reality and its properties. 
Even though there is a deep-seated distinction between logical and 
mathematical sciences and those that have nature or the human 
socio-historical world as their object, they all derive from the atti-
tude involved in the conceptual cognition of what is the case; even 
in their most abstract development, each science is a system of 
means for the cognition of reality. The categorial relations that are 
distinctive of the system of the conceptual cognition of what is the 
case are reality, thing, qualities, states, action, and being acted on. 
This cognition of what is the case constitutes the foundation for 
all value-determinations. [Secondly,] both the determination of 
life-values and the evaluation of external states of affairs refer to 
realities that constitute the substratum for establishing values. In 
the case of life-values, it is the reality given in self-perception, and 
in the case of evaluation, it is the reality posited in external per-
ception. But the appraisal of value as such is not an assertion 
about an occurrence; it is not discharged through categories of 
cognizing of what is the case: here a new attitude of the subject 
located in feeling emerges; this first makes possible the relations of 
value and appraisal or the gradation of values. These relations 
must be objectified to enable value judgments to come about. What 
is predicated as such a relation has reality as its substratum, al-
though it is given only in a felt attitude. [Thirdly, we find that] the 
same is true for knowledge about purposes whose validity depends 
on the system of values. Such a system influences how questions 
about the hierarchy of purposes or goods and of the highest good 
are decided. The validity of an assertion in this domain requires 
that these relations be articulated into an objectively valid system 
of purposes. That which is required of such a universal system of 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
purposes can be expressed in a rule. Once again, I underline the 
connection that exists between the setting of a purpose in willing 
and rule-giving. Every satisfaction is already related to the state 
that brings it about as universal to particular. When willing intro-
duces a change as its goal, then this change stands as a particular 
to the universal of a desired satisfaction. Accordingly, the will to 
satisfaction can also be regarded as the positing of a rule that 
covers individual possible changes leading to satisfaction. Thus the 
299 
rule is the form of valid knowledge in which the nature of volition 
is expressed. 
This also answers the question to what extent we can designate 
regulations, rules, and norms as knowledge. 2 In ordinary life we 
say that we knew or did not know about a rule or regulation. This 
expresses only cognizance of the fact, however, that I am acquainted 
with a grammatical rule or that I am cognizant of the relationship 
between an authority, the issuing of a regulation, and its content. 
But if the system in which rules or regulations acquire their va-
lidity from valid presuppositions within a purposive domain is 
transparent to me, then norms, rules, or even legal regulations are 
raised to objectively necessary and universally valid knowledge. 
Here a rationally grounded obligation finds expression. The striv-
ing for such a system, in which legal regulations would be raised 
to the level of knowledge and would thus be secured by reason, 
has produced natural law. A regulation, rule, or norm cannot be 
taken to be a judgment in the narrower sense. For it does not 
assert that a regulation exists, but that it is valid. The obligation 
that attaches to a content that has been commanded is not a predi-
cate. If I take the proposition in this sense, then I negate what is 
meant to be expressed in it, namely, being bound by a regulation, 
rule, or norm. 1 
The difference of attitude in these three domains of knowledge 
can also be expressed as follows: conceptual cognition of life-
values as well as of the use-values of outer things is inseparable 
from their aftereffect on feeling and produces changes in how 
value is established. Theory is, so to speak, only an intermediary 
between the first value-assignations of naive empirical conscious-
ness and those of a life-attitude that has been illuminated by self-
reflection. It proceeds by means of appraisals that are rooted in 
felt attitudes. Likewise, in the domain of willing, theory strives for 
2 See Sigwart. (D) 
l Our thinking can be correct without there being a judgment. (D) 
320 
APPENDIX 
an advance from positive precepts of ethics, law, and religiosity 
toward a valid system. The final goal of theory in this domain is 
again only a universally valid system of general value-assessments, 
purposes, and rules. 
3 
Let us consider the operations of thought in these three domains. 
300 
The description of the processes that lead to objectively necessary 
knowledge resulted in the advance in each of these domains. The 
beginning is to be found in what is singular and contingent in 
particular lived experiences; in each case, reflection, doubt, and 
conflict lead us to strive for objectively necessary knowledge. We 
seek for objective reality, an unconditioned standard of assess-
ment, a highest good, and an unconditionally valid norm of ac-
tion. This tendency toward the unconditioned, which, for Kant, 
was the distinctive trait of theoretical reason, asserts itself in all 
three spheres of knowledge. This means that thought advances 
from relation to relation without ever, as far as we can see, attain-
ing its goal. The will to know, the purposive system of knowledge, 
the striving to capture the ideal of the true, the valuable, and the 
good in valid knowledge have as their basic counterpart processes 
that generate valid knowledge step by step on the way to this goal. 
The system and the laws of thought are dependent on this univer-
sal characteristic of the cognitive process. 
4 
The most universal quality of thought that recurs in every domain 
of its activity can be designated by the expressions "synthesis," 
"connecting," and "relating." All these terms express an operation 
through which a manifold is gathered into a unity. Connection or 
synthesis is meant to designate all ways of relating contents to 
each other; accordingly, separation or negation falls under this 
concept of a synthetic function as much as connection in the nar-
rower sense. Thus the expression "relating" most closely approxi-
mates what needs to be said. 
The activity of relating encompasses distinctive operations.4 To-
4 In the margin, Dilthey refers to Eduard von Hartmann's Kategorienlehre and to 
Sigwart. (H) 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
321 
gether we designate the operations involved in making distinc-
tions, finding similarities, and apprehending degrees of difference 
as aspects of comparison. It gives rise to our consciousness of the 
given manifold. Only then do the operations of separating and 
connecting become possible. I apprehend the notes of a melody as 
different from one another. They are thus separable and can then 
be united again in melody. We can isolate what the different senses 
give of a thing, such as color, odor, and taste, and then reconnect 
them again. This always brings with it a change in attentiveness 
both in terms of direction and intensity. And it also provides the 
basis for the transition to the process of abstraction by means of 
the already given elementary processes. As we survey a series of 
things, qualities, and processes, our attention can be directed to 
3or 
that which unites them and we abstract from that which differen-
tiates them from each other. 
These operations of comparing, connecting, and separating are 
contained both in the consciousness of the identity of an object 
and in the formation of abstract representations. I renew the per-
ceptual image of a painting as often as my eye returns to it. As I 
do this, I am conscious that for me the perceptual acts themselves 
are distinct from each other; but at the same time I experience that 
their content remains the same. Thus I grasp the object as being 
the same. I bring to consciousness its identity and the difference of 
my acts of apprehension. And however different the processes in 
which abstract representations arise may be, they always contain 
the same operations of differentiating and of finding resemblances, 
of separating, and of connecting. 
5 These operations then make it 
possible to grasp relations in particular empirically givens. We ex-
perience a span of time, and we grasp a spatial distance. These 
operations are contained in every kind of knowledge. Value-
assessment occurs by means of the operations of finding simi-
larities or dissimilarities and by discerning gradations. The same is 
true for the preferences of volitional acts. These operations are 
common to all discursive thought. By discursive thought we mean 
thought that is tied to language or to some other corresponding 
system of signs such as that of number. Even the perceptual or 
representational formations to which thought refers can be traced 
back to these operations as their condition. This asserts nothing, 
of course, about the way that sense perception, consciousness of 
objects, or abstract representations come about. It is the task of 
psychology to investigate the nature of such [genetic] processes. 
5 In the margin, Dilthey refers to Erdmann's Logik. (H) 
322 
APPENDIX 
From the standpoint of logic and the theory of knowledge, it only 
matters that the processes that supply the spatial and temporal 
series of impressions and inner states are connected into higher 
formations so that they can be conceived as produced by their 
specified functions. Whatever processes may be involved, they are 
equivalent to the functions of the logical operations mentioned 
earlier. This and nothing else is the sense of the theory of uncon-
scious inferences by which our perceptual images arise. The proof 
of this lies in the fact that sense perceptions, especially illusions of 
the senses, are capable of being explained as conditioned by these 
primary logical operations. 
It is further self-evident that the processes of association and 
reproduction are to be included as means that work together to 
302 
call up and thus make possible the emergence of logical functions. 
To this we add the epistemological presupposition that memory-
images can have only a representative function relative to percep-
tions. Although attentiveness intensifies consciousness and shifts 
the way it is apportioned, it introduces no change in the appre-
hended facts themselves. 
Finally, the logical functions designated as the primary logical 
operations that appear in each of the main mental attitudes fall 
under categories posited by such attitudes. These categories ex-
press relations between the contents of such attitudes. Together 
with the elementary formal functions of thought, they condition 
the development of representations that lie at the basis of discur-
sive thought. They express the relational forms within an attitude 
that constitute" the objectively necessary congruity of its contents. 
Reality, value, and purpose are the basic categories that emerge 
from these three kinds of functions. 
Categories can be divided into two classes: those that are ab-
stracted from the formal functions of thought, namely, difference, 
similarity, sameness, degree, identity, unity, plurality, totality, and 
those that express the objectively necessary congruity of contents 
that have been posited within psychic attitudes. Reality, thing-
hood, causality, value, purpose, and means are categories of this 
kind. Other categories can be added as the network of knowledge 
expands- they can be formal or objective in accordance with their 
proper place. We can neither delimit a determinate number of cat-
egories nor bring their mutual relations into a definitive order. 
" Reading konstituiert for konstruiert. 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
5 
The elementary formal logic operations are not about contents, 
objects, and processes but about relations. This is what makes 
them functions of thought. From the critical perspective of their 
truth-value, however, they disclose an affinity with perceptions. I 
place two shades of gray side by side. The perception of each of 
these two shades, the immediate givenness of what is contained in 
such perceiving, the way apprehension is constrained by this given-
all this comes back as such when I apprehend the difference be-
tween these two shades of gray. In terms of its truth-value, think-
ing of a distinction re-presents a perception of the second degree, 
as I indicated earlier. Both perceptions provide the conditions ac-
303 
cording to which it becomes possible to note a distinction. When 
notes follow one another in intervals, then the conditions are ful-
filled for bringing about the function of consciousness, which is to 
separate them from each other. When qualities of different prove-
nance are united in the object, then the conditions are also fulfilled 
to separate them and to single them out from the total representa-
tion of the object. And although the activity of consciousness of 
separating and reuniting possesses a greater formal freedom, its 
content is still determined by an objective necessity. When an ag-
gregate of impressions is set loose from its background and set in 
motion in space, it can even separate itself from its background. I 
merely raise to consciousness what in fact occurs here when I as-
sert the separateness of these impressions from the background of 
objects. I derive further qualities of thought from the task inherent 
in the purposive system of thought- producing objectively valid 
knowledge- and from the ways in which processes directed at this 
goal are continually underway. These qualities of thought are the 
conditions for the solution of the problem. The goal of thought is 
to move from the conditioned nature of every given and the rela-
tivity that comes with it toward objectively necessary knowledge. 
From this it follows that relations must constantly be expanded to 
include new constituent parts. 
THE DELIMITATION OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
FIRST DRAFT OF THIRD STUDY 
The Task 
I begin with a set of sciences available for experience and then 
seek their essence and grounding. History, political-economy, ju-
risprudence, the sciences of government and religion, the study of 
literature, poetry, art, and philosophy, stand in close relations to 
each other: for they all approach experiential reality by focusing 
on lived experiences, feelings, strivings, volitional acts, processes 
of representation, imagination, and thought. They seek to grasp 
these activities and to submit them to conceptual cognition. And 
as these lived experiences are interrelated, we find it necessary to 
grasp these relations. My starting point is this factually existing 
continuum that has emerged among these experiential sciences. 
This nexus constitutes the factual given for the logician and the 
epistemologist. It may be the case that they find themselves re-
quired to replace this nexus with another modern grouping. This 
raises the question of the justification for preferring other possible 
groupings. But this question can only be considered on the basis of 
the actually existing nexus. The expression "human sciences" 
should not designate anything but this factual nexus. This involves 
no assumption about the way in which the nexus is given. And if 
psychology stands in a relation to these sciences whereby, on the 
one hand, it grounds them, and, on the other, it uses their data, 
then this should initially (be considered) only as a fact, and the 
question whether it truly belongs to these sciences remains open. 
The human sciences form an epistemic nexus that attempts to 
bring to objective conceptual cognition all attainable lived experi-
ences that constitute the human sociohistorical world as present, 
305 
remembered, and understood. Individual scholars work to achieve 
this; they contend with extraordinary difficulties, but the success 
of their work increases their assurance that from partly obliterated 
traces, lived experiences can be retrieved and their course appre-
hended so that finally, the full scope of the human world will be 
cognized and the domain of reality can be manifested in this 
system. 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
This leads to questions about further inquiry. To what extent is 
the confidence in progressively objective conceptual cognition that 
binds all who work together in the human sciences justified? The 
very work that is produced in the workshop of the human sciences 
must be raised to reflection upon itself. We must find the forms 
and categories of conceptual cognition in the human sciences, es-
tablish the relationships on which their epistemic validity is based, 
and raise the methods of cognitive procedures to logical aware-
ness. This will increase the reliability and the range of applicability 
of the human sciences. 
These problems are also dealt with in the context of philosophi-
cal systems, i.e., implicitly in general logic and epistemology; then, 
however, in particular applications of universal theories to the ob-
jects of the human sciences. But here in our foundation of the 
human sciences, these problems must constitute the exclusive sub-
ject matter. 
This restriction yields noteworthy advantages. For one, logico-
epistemological reflection on the human sciences can be placed in 
an appropriate relation to historical reflection on them. Reflection 
can be restricted to those propositions that are absolutely required 
for the foundation of the human sciences. Thus many disputed 
questions that a philosophical system must deal with, but which 
present major difficulties, can be excluded as lying beyond our 
task. The continuum that extends from the first fundamental prop-
ositions to the methodology [of the human sciences] can be better 
articulated. A final advantage, whose worth each may assess from 
his own standpoint, is that these inquiries stay free of a particular 
problematic involved in undertaking a philosophical system, namely, 
the problem of the relativity everywhere of historical, religious, 
and philosophical as well as social and political phenomena. This 
problem exists for every modern human being, but especially for 
those who investigate the sociohistorical world. 
It lies in the nature of the situation that a considerable portion 
of the propositions providing the initial foundation can only be 
306 
demonstrated generally for the entire field of cognition. The prob-
lem of objective conceptual cognition, the determination of the 
sense that this term and the terms that correspond to it, "being," 
"reality," and "objectivity," alone can have, if they are to have 
their fulfillment in given cognitive experiences, can only be given a 
general treatment. The same is true for the theory of lived experi-
ence, the nexus leading from empirical consciousness to the thesis 
of consciousness, theories of logical forms and laws, and other 
parts of the foundation of the human sciences. 
APPENDIX 
The investigator in the field of the human sciences must also 
make the revolutionary move, which starts with an empirical con-
sciousness that assumes the reality of the psychic subject, things, 
and other persons and leads by means of experience and the expe-
riential sciences to the critical insight, that these three modes of 
reality, in relation to which life runs its course, are there only as a 
correlation between consciousness and its contents. And just as 
general as this nexus, in which the presuppositions of empirical 
consciousness are fully superseded, are the propositions that pos-
itively establish the extent to which knowledge of the psychic nexus 
in lived experiences, which one may designate as the psychic sub-
ject, is based on outer things and on other persons. This inquiry 
likewise includes the universal theory of the forms, laws, and cate-
gories of thought. 
Only on the basis of this universal foundation can we solve the 
special problem of the human sciences, which is how awareness of 
the reality of human spirit and the conceptual cognition of its to-
tality emerges from present and remembered lived experiences and 
from those that convey in them the understanding of other lived 
experiences, present or past. For this insight, which results from 
the development of conceptual cognition in the human sciences, 
lies at the basis of all reflection on these sciences: this reality and 
its coherence is formed by the human spirit on the basis of its lived 
experiences using the medium of thought in accordance with cate-
gories that articulate the relations of the given in it; this reality is 
the creation of spirit. In the human sciences too, objective com:ep-
tual cognition does not signify the replication, so to speak, of a 
reality existing outside of them. The cognitive process here re-
mains bound by its means of intuition, understanding, and con-
ceptual thought. The human sciences have never even wanted to 
achieve such a replica, and the further they advance, the less they 
307 
want to. "Rather, they refer what happens and what has hap-
pened- the unique, the contingent, the momentary- to a system 
of value and meaning. As it progresses, conceptual cognition seeks 
to penetrate this system ever more deeply. It becomes ever more 
objective in its grasp, without ever being able to surpass its own 
essence, namely, it can experience what is only through re-feeling 
and re-construing, through connecting and separating, through 
abstract systems and a nexus of concepts." 7 
The system of jurisprudence is distinct from the sum of lived 
7 See GS VII, 3 above [this volume, 23-24] (D). 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
experiences involved in legal transactions or court proceedings 
and judgments. The same distinction exists between the complex 
of lived experiences involved in communion with the invisible, 
which is not subject to determination by mechanical intervention, 
and insight into the concepts that constitute the essence of reli-
gious communion, religious experience, and religious assertions. 
The forms in which [human spirit] is actualized and the cultural 
systems in which the purposive systems of the sociohistorical 
world are realized consist of lived experiences and the relations 
between them. But the conceptual order whereby these lived expe-
riences are raised to conceptual cognition first emerges from the 
work of the human spirit, forming a second spiritual world, which 
is indeed based on the first but can be created only by means of 
understanding, judgment, and conceptual thought proper to hu-
man spirit. 
The history of the human sciences shows, and logico-epistemological 
reflection elucidates, how a historical narrative of a unique occur-
rence can no more be or seek to be a copy of past events than 
jurisprudence or religious theory: the narrative too is a new cre-
ation of the human spirit grounded in the conditions of conceptual 
cognition. The more deeply history penetrates the nexus of what 
happens, the more clearly this distinctive character discloses itself. 
For this is the decisive thing in grasping connectedness in history: 
its nexus can neither be read off from the remnants of historical 
events that have been handed down, nor may ideas from the so-
called philosophy of history be projected into what is handed 
down by tradition in order to constitute it. The historical events 
themselves, as they are handed down and gathered both concur-
rently and successively, never as such provide the means and mate-
rial to derive a connecting causal system or the formative laws 
that permeate them, or a sense of the progress and development 
that may be achieved in them. Only on the basis of analytic sci-
ences of the specific purposive systems that pervade history as cul-
308 
tural systems, and further, on the basis of analytic knowledge of 
the internal structure of organizations that have been formed in 
history as provided by political science, is gradual insight into the 
nexus of history achieved. Only in this way can we resolve the 
question whether laws of formation or development can be ob-
tained from the coexistence and succession of events. Historical 
reliability does not lie, as one might think, in transcribing events 
according to their coexistence and succession. There will always 
be much that is in doubt in such a transcription. Historical re-
APPENDIX 
liability is even less to be sought by laying hold of the personal 
individual forces that are active in history. Only if we start from 
the framework gained through the systematic human sciences 
within which these forces have been formed and on which they 
exert their influence do we begin to have some insight into their 
development and some standard for their value. And therefore, 
that which is most secure and most important for inquiry in the 
human sciences is the conceptual cognition of the major cultural 
forms and their external organization, their development, their re-
ciprocal productivity within an age, the structure of society as it 
exists within a specifiable period, and the phases in society that 
gradually lead to changes in it. 
Therefore a single nexus is actualized in the study of sociohis-
torical reality. It is the same reality of the world of human spirit 
that is manifested from different perspectives either as universal 
history or as the totality of the systematic human sciences. To un-
derstand this reality, to grasp its connectedness in thought, an 
always present awareness of the conceptual cognition of the sys-
tematic human sciences is required when the universal historical 
perspective is being formed; and when its understanding is di-
rected at the systematic conceptual cognition of a cultural system 
or of a social organization, it requires the presence of universal-
historical knowledge. This entails that the most fundamental ques-
tion concerning the possibility of objective conceptual cognition in 
the human sciences is to grasp how the coexistence and succession 
of historical events can become accessible to the cognitive experi-
ences of the individual through memory, understanding, and his-
torical critique, and how, the [structural] nexus of this coexistence 
and succession of the events can be given. The solution to this 
question presupposes the theory of the structural psychic nexus as 
309 
it is realized in the psychophysical life-unit while at the same time 
connecting with other psychophysical life-units. 
Inherent in the human sciences is a connectedness that realizes 
the productive intention of an objective conceptual cognition of 
the world of human spirit. It extends from the lived experiences of 
individuals beginning to reflect on history, poetry, and religious 
doctrine while still enclosed within their individuality, to the ob-
jective grasp of the sociohistorical world in universal history and 
in the systematic human sciences. The foundation of the human 
sciences must begin from the nexus of conceptual cognition imma-
nent in them. Their fundamental problem is to determine what 
sense the concepts "objective conceptual cognition," "what is the 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
case," "reality," and "being" have in this system of the human 
sciences. And since conceptual, systematic cognition is inherent to 
every part of the human sciences, sometimes as task, sometimes as 
presupposition, the question is how the objectivity of concepts can 
be achieved on the basis of which the nexus of historical experi-
ences in their coexistence and succession can then be established. 
There fore the foundation of the human sciences is first and fore-
most an interpretation of the concepts that are constitutive of the 
overall world of human spirit that has been discovered in the hu-
man sciences. We give the name "understanding" to the process in 
which we recognize something inner from signs that are outwardly 
given. It attains its highest perfection both in exhausting the con-
tent to be understood and in reaching universal validity in know-
ing it through exegesis or interpretation. By the expression "inter-
pretation" we indicate the technical understanding of lasting fixed 
manifestations of life. Concepts are also such fixed manifestations 
of life, and by the interpretation of concepts, we ought accord-
ingly to understand a universally valid knowledge of what is in-
tended by the concept and by the linguistic expression correspond-
ing to it. The method of interpretation of the concept consists of a 
composite procedure. The fulfillment of lived experiences re-pre-
sented by the concept, and the establishment of the set of charac-
teristics that are common to these lived experiences, constitute one 
side of the procedure. But since the concept has its place in sci-
ence, we must be able to substitute its interpretation whenever the 
concept appears there. Interpretation only attains its goal when in 
each context in which a concept appears, its interpretation corre-
sponds to that context. Indeed, even a word is only understood 
3 ro 
and univocally determined when what is meant by it is redis-
covered in every context that contains it. The foundation of the 
human sciences can at first be nothing but such an interpretation, 
for a universal philosophical foundation that posits more compre-
hensive and higher goals has not yet been attained. A universally 
acknowledged theory of science does not exist. After all, the the-
ory of knowledge is one of the most recent sciences; Kant was the 
first to see its problem in its general character. And since Fichte's 
premature attempt to gather Kant's analyses into a complete sys-
tem, further efforts have always led to new difficulties and 
brought new tasks into view. Attempts at a solution are just as 
irreconcilably opposed to each other today as they were long ago 
in the field of metaphysics. 
By defining and explicating the concepts that constitute the over-
330 
APPENDIX 
all context of the human sciences and the categories by which the 
world of human spirit is thought, we provide the basis for the 
work of the human sciences to reflect upon itself. Then it will also 
become evident that the concepts that are proper to the human 
sciences and constitute their interrelations are grounded in de-
scribable lived experiences and, ultimately, in the mode of experi-
encing that characterizes this domain. 
On the basis of this investigation, it must then be possible to 
show that the reservations that have been made against the objec-
tive cognitive value of the human sciences can be dissolved. The 
most important of these reservations can already be resolved by 
the correct interpretation of the concepts that constitute the sys-
tem of the human sciences. 
SECOND DRAFT OF THIRD STUDY 
First Chapter 
The Task 
The division of the sciences into those pertammg to nature and 
those of the human spirit can only be grounded in the course of 
inquiry itself. Here at the beginning of the inquiry it must suffice 
to point to the affinity that exists among the group of disciplines 
that we have designated as the human sciences. These human sci-
ences include history, political economy, jurisprudence, the sci-
ences of government and religion, the studies of literature, poetry, 
art, and philosophical world-views. Let us begin with something 
simple in order to delve into the nature of their affinity. Lived 
31r 
experience, understanding the lived experiences of others, and the 
judgments and concepts that express the states of affairs that were 
experienced and understood are closely related to each other. Lived 
experience grounds the other two types of knowledge. All under-
standing of the expression of another's lived experience occurs 
only on the basis of one's own lived experience. The states of af-
fairs given in lived experience and understanding can then be re-
presented in judgments and concepts. Because judgments and con-
cepts are based on lived experience and understanding, a network 
of knowledge develops in which lived experience, understanding, 
and their re-presentation are linked reciprocally. The same is true 
of all the disciplines that have here been gathered as the human 
sciences. They are all rooted in this network. However, they also 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
331 
involve states of affairs that cannot be experienced or understood, 
namely, physical facts. History describes the tumult and the up-
roar of battles, the position of enemy armies, the effects of their 
artillery, and the influence of the terrain on the outcome. Here, as 
throughout the course of history, physical processes, the necessities 
inherent in them, and the effects that result from them constitute 
an important part of the historical narrative. But they belong to 
history only to the extent that they determine the development of 
individuals or associations of individuals, or as they come into 
play in deliberating the means for bringing about the goals of indi-
viduals or of communities, or influence the outcome of actions. In 
short, those physical processes must be connected in some way to 
what we can experience and understand. The same relationship 
can be shown in the systematic human sciences. The extent to 
which land is populated depends on the relationship between the 
work required to cultivate it and the yield it provides. The differ-
ences in soil quality on which this relationship depends is of inter-
est to economists only insofar as it is linked to need, labor, and 
satisfaction, or to what is known about those things in lived expe-
rience, in understanding lived experiences, or in judgments and 
concepts about them. 
Let us go further. All the systematic human sciences are based 
on the relation that exists between what has been experienced and 
understood and the concepts that express it. What has been expe-
rienced and understood is re-presented in concepts that find their 
fulfillment in the content of lived experience and understanding. 
The essence of the latter can thus attain re-presentation in a con-
ceptual system. This leads us to a related point: what is given in 
this manner in lived experience and understanding exhibits certain 
qualities that are common to it throughout and distinguish it from 
what cannot be so experienced and understood, namely, from 
physical facts. Every value and every purpose of life is contained 
312 
in our lived experience and in what we understand. 
8 The con-
sciousness of the value of our existence is based on our experience 
of life's fullness, on a deeply felt awareness of the richness of the 
reality of life, and on making the most of what we have within us. 
Value is assigned to anything that lies outside the experiencing 
subject only to the extent that a re-experiencing mode of under-
standing can grasp it as a carrier of such an inner world or as a 
H A reference to Introduction to the Human Sciences [SW I, sS) is found in the 
margin. (H) 
332 
APPENDIX 
source that can affect the feelings of psychophysical life-units. 
Whatever is capable of being experienced and understood as it 
pertains to the domain of the human sciences is characterized by 
the fact that it exhibits values together with the meaning of per-
sons and events. 
One final quality of the human sciences that links them to one 
another and differentiates them from the natural sciences must 
still be brought into focus. The whole fabric of the world to which 
they are connected, the sociohistorical world, consists of psycho-
physical life-units whose lived experiences are capable of being 
experienced and understood. They are the carriers and constitu-
ents of every structure found in present or past societies. And 
when these facts are taken in conjunction with the ones concern-
ing the value of psychophysical life-units and what happens be-
tween them, then the twofold direction of research in the human 
sciences results. "The apprehension of what is singular and indi-
vidual is for them as much a final end as the explication of ab-
stract uniformities. " 9 
These are the essential characteristics that can be established 
prior to our investigation itself merely by analyzing the historical 
development of the human sciences. These characteristics suffice 
to redescribe the affinities among the individual disciplines that 
are generally agreed to count as human sciences in terms of their 
fundamental connectedness and their common differences from the 
natural sciences. Thus there is sufficient justification to make such 
a group of sciences the basis of the forthcoming investigation. A 
definitive determination of the concept of the human sciences will 
only be possible in the course of our investigation. It will require 
principles whose proof involves considerable difficulties and which 
can only be grounded by a whole series of other truths. Among 
these principles, the most important is that in experiencing and 
understanding a nexus or connective structure is given with the 
lived experiences themselves. This opens up an insight into an es-
sential characteristic of the conceptual cognition of the human sci-
ences, by which their previously disclosed qualities can be united 
3 I 3 
into one final, comprehensive formula. And not only can the es-
sence of the human sciences be definitively established on the basis 
of this principle, but their scope can also be broadened and the 
analysis of their parts determined. For if this principle can be dem-
onstrated, then it makes possible a descriptive and analytic psy-
9 Introduction to the Human Sciences (D), SW I, 78. 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
333 
chology that completes the group of human sciences and giVes 
them systematic unity. 
As the course of this investigation goes further, therefore, the 
essence and scope of the human sciences can be determined by 
analyzing the conceptual cognition of the human sciences. This 
conceptual determination will be confirmed through agreement 
with the actual ways in which particular sciences cooperate and 
through the fruitfulness of the assertions that can be made about 
this complex. 
The human sciences aim at objective conceptual cognition of 
their object. All human scientists are joined together in this effort, 
and their labors converge in this direction. They establish facts; 
they seek to re-experience what has happened by understanding 
the fullness of the meaning inherent in it; they apprehend the 
nexus that exists in an event and analyze it; and, on the basis of 
this analysis, they separate systems of partial contents by a method 
of abstraction and bring it to conceptual cognition. This in turn 
leads to new means to grasp what has happened in more depth. 
Whether they endeavor to fathom the singular or to cognize the 
universal; whether they investigate connectedness in psychic life, 
in history, or in society, or want to recognize a lawlike order; 
whether they are, like Herder or Lotze, more struck by the values 
that are realized in the history of our species, and by the meaning 
that joins the parts of this history into a significant whole; or 
whether they, like Hume or Buckle, 
10 investigate the causal nexus 
of events and the uniformities in them, it is always the case that 
the impetus of their efforts is directed at objective conceptual cog-
nition just as in the natural sciences. And the history of the human 
sciences shows how their actual developmental course constantly 
brings with it a more penetrating awareness of history, cultural 
systems, and psychic life. The reliability with which scholars ac-
complish their task in the human sciences is based especially on 
this. At the same time, however, they begin to reflect about what 
they do. This extends from the technical aspects of their work to 
the consciousness of the nature of the knowledge that is produced 
by it. The beginnings of such a consciousness we find in Thucydi-
314 
des; and we discover it later, in a more developed state, in Poly-
bius, who lived amidst epistemological debates. 
In modern times, such reflection asserts itself at the most diver-
10 See Dilthey's review of H. T. Buckle's History of Civilization in England, SW 
4, 261-69. 
334 
APPENDIX 
gent places in the human sciences. Theological investigations into 
hermeneutics and historical inquiries into criticism deal with the 
procedures involved in understanding and in establishing facts on 
the basis of the remnants of tradition. Natural law jurists and le-
gal scholars inquire into the methods by which law and jurispru-
dence can be scientifically founded. Vico relates his historico-
religious and historico-legal researches to the ultimate depths of 
human cognition. Hume's historical work has a close link with his 
inquiries into human beings, their capacities for cognition, and the 
immanent necessity and scientific lawfulness of human events. 
Controversies between historians and philosophers of history stirred 
the eighteenth century. The conflict between the natural system of 
human sciences and the Historical School took up the first decades 
of the nineteenth century. And beginning with Comte, in whose 
writings the notion of the historical plays a major role, to Buckle, 
and finally, to the most recent disputes about the goal and the 
methods of history, we find ever more self-reflection in the human 
sciences. The task that arises in this historical continuum is to 
consider the legitimacy of knowledge in the human sciences and to 
raise the logical constitution, the procedures, and methods of this 
knowledge to philosophical consciousness. The philosophical foun-
dation of the system of the human sciences would then be in-
cluded in this task. And just as the problem that has been posed 
by this work [of philosophical consciousness] has come from the 
human sciences, so the direction of their work is predelineated by 
the actual might of progress that everywhere determines them. 
This direction is evident at every point in their work; it functions 
in every procedure used by these sciences, and it links all pro-
cedures to each other. Objective conceptual cognition of society, of 
history, and of man is their goal throughout, and everywhere they 
presuppose the possibility of such cognition. 
This presupposition is founded not only on confirmation that 
comes with advances in objective conceptual cognition but like-
wise on the properties of knowledge that characterize [the practice 
of] the human sciences. Human scientists are imbued with these 
properties, even when they themselves do not reflect on them. 
These properties of knowing manifest themselves through the 
315 
practical manipulation of the working tools that are provided by 
lived experience, understanding, and the re-presentation of what 
was experienced and understood in judgments and concepts. It is 
important to demonstrate this in particular cases. Such a demon-
stration does not have as its object the establishment of the human 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
335 
sciences through their philosophical foundation (this will not be 
the object of inquiry until much later). It is related for the time 
being only to the manner in which these presuppositions are at 
work in research in the human sciences. 
Lived experience is always certain of itself. Whereas in the natu-
ral sciences, the research destroys the presupposed reality of the 
sensible qualities of the things with which they start, in the work 
of historians, jurists, or artists, a doubt never arises as to the real-
ity of what has been given in lived experience. Equally indubitable 
for them is the possibility of understanding what has been meant, 
expressed, or asserted in some mode of expression or in some 
statement. To be sure, they find that understanding proves itself to 
be limited in many cases. The human scientist learns that it re-
quires much practice and foresight in order to make understand-
ing reliable within its limits. On the basis of his own needs, he 
develops the technique of hermeneutics and its scientific discipline, 
thereby making understanding rule-guided. He becomes conscious 
of its procedures and their legitimacy, and technically refines the 
safeguards, precautionary measures, and procedures that ensure 
that reality is grasped through this approach. And in the course of 
his work, he discovers how lived experience and understanding 
reciprocally corroborate each other. From the psychological stand-
point, lived experience and understanding are always distinct. 
They belong to the region of the self and of the other. Procedur-
ally, they always exclude each other, but a structural connected-
ness exists between them so that the re-experiencing of the other is 
only made possible by a reference back to the lived experiences of 
one's own self. The relationship that arises here, therefore, is that 
whatever I understand in another, I can find in myself as lived 
experience; and whatever I experience, I can rediscover through 
understanding in another person. By moving continually between 
lived experience and understanding, the human scientist ensures 
reliability about the content, which can be thus "transposed," so 
to speak, from one mode of experience into the other. At the same 
time, he is certain of the existence of other persons. This assurance 
is based on the presupposition that the senses give us something 
that exists independently of us, and that the procedures by which 
we distinguish the individual person within this [reality] are valid. 
Later we must show the basis for the fact that our natural thought 
accepts the reality of something independent from us and uner-
316 
ringly clings to it. 
What is experienced and understood is conceived by human sci-
APPENDIX 
entists as adequately explicable in judgments and concepts. Here 
too consciousness of reliability results from praxis and its constant 
adjustments. 
It is especially important to examine the foundation for this 
conviction [about explicability] that is common to all scientists. 
On this point, in particular, critical consciousness encounters an 
extraordinary difficulty. The system of the human sciences origi-
nates from the specific givens provided by history and society. The 
system is formed in thought from materials that have been experi-
enced and understood. It is realized in categories that belong to 
human spirit, i.e., it is a creation of spirit. The human sciences do 
not fashion a copy of the singular complex given to them in rem-
nants of the past and fragments of the present. All their concep-
tual cognition requires universal concepts. The system of jurispru-
dence is distinct from the sum of lived experiences involved in 
legal transactions or in legal decisions. The same distinction exists 
between the complex of lived experiences in which communion 
with what is invisible and not determinable by any mere mechani-
cal intervention takes place and the concepts that either express 
the essence of religious communion, religious experience, and reli-
gious assertions or determine the forms in which religious commu-
nion is realized. Similarly, every other science of a cultural system 
is founded on what has been experienced or understood, but this 
is made cognitive through the medium of judgment and concep-
tual thought characteristic of spirit. Even history is not a copy of 
the events that have been handed down to us: it also is a new 
spiritual creation grounded in cognitive conditions. Historical 
events themselves, as they are handed down, gathered concur-
rently and successively as such, never provide the means for deriv-
ing a connecting causal nexus or for grasping the formative laws 
that govern them. Concepts and universal judgments serve as in-
termediaries between the events and the conception of them as a 
nexus. These concepts and judgments are first developed in the 
practice of life. The gradual advancement of insight into the his-
torical nexus depends also on the development of analytic sciences 
of particular purposive systems that permeate history as cultural 
3 r7 
systems. It furthermore depends on analytical knowledge about 
organizations that have been formed in history, i.e., on a discipline 
that may be designated as political science. Not only are historical 
understanding and the systematic human sciences based on infer-
ences from the facts of the sociohistorical world, but they also 
presuppose certain insights about the course of psychic life. 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
337 
Everywhere we grasp the nexus of history through concepts and 
general judgments. They are first developed in the experiences of 
practical life; as their connectedness and their legitimacy continue 
to increase, the systematic human sciences and psychology emerge. 
Keeping pace with this development, the connectedness of histori-
cal processes gains in scope and is recognized more deeply. Indeed, 
even the characterization of historical persons and the portrayal of 
historical events depend on this development, for these require 
concepts as well, and their validity and usefulness must be secured 
in thought. 
The reliability of the historian, the jurist, and the religious scholar 
in adequately re-presenting in thought what has been given them 
is based on this continual interaction of judgments and concepts 
with what is re-presented in them as experienced and understood. 
The interchangeability of what is given with what is thought is 
demonstrated to them every hour that their work advances based 
on this assumption. What has been experienced and understood 
constantly leads to concepts that again find their fulfillment in 
lived experience and understanding. By comparing, isolating, and 
abstracting from what has been experienced and understood to be 
the basic feature of religiosity, the religious scholar defines what is 
common as a communion with the invisible, the experiences aris-
ing from it, and the dogmas and life-praxis that are grounded in it; 
and any concept for all this finds fulfillment again in what has 
been experienced and understood. 
It is the same spiritual reality that from one perspective is expli-
cated in the judgments describing events in society and history and 
from another perspective is cognized as the complex of the system-
atic human sciences. Universal history becomes a science in the 
presence of the conceptual cognition of the systematic human sci-
ences and ... 
Second Chapter 
(How Is Conceptual Cognition in the Human 
Sciences Possible?) 
I 
That which constitutes or grounds the human sciences derives 
from lived experiences, their expression, the understanding of ex-
pressions for lived experiences and concepts that refer to lived ex-
APPENDIX 
perience. We are dealing here with distinctions, but not with dif-
ferent contents. Rather, everything to the extent that it appears in 
consciousness is primarily lived experience; this is true for expres-
sions and for their understanding just as much as for concepts. But 
insofar as a structural relation develops between lived experience 
and its expression and between understanding and expression, a 
distinctive formation belonging to the sphere of the human sci-
ences arises. The expression can again be a concept. But if I extri-
cate myself from the above mentioned structural relation and adopt 
the other relation of objective apprehension, according to which 
cognition occurs through a relation of concepts that have their 
fulfillment in lived experience and understanding, then I assume a 
conceptual attitude that has its distinctive relations to lived experi-
ence and understanding. These relations involve the creation of 
concepts by abstraction from lived experience and understanding 
and then the fulfillment of concepts through them. Concepts are 
created by judgments, and therefore, the same relationship that 
exists between lived experience, understanding, and concept also 
exists between concept and judgment. 
The basis for all the constituents manifested in the human sci-
ences are and remain lived experiences. For every understanding 
of the expression of another's lived experiences takes place on the 
basis of one's own, and every judgment and every concept is only 
created on the basis of lived experiences and understandings. 
Conclusion: the human sciences are founded on the knowledge 
of lived experiences. 
2 
The human sciences and their logico-epistemological foundation 
presuppose throughout a knowledge of lived experiences. The 
condition for this is contained in experiencing as such: reflexive 
awareness. Reflexive awareness only asserts that something is in 
consciousness. The ambiguity of the word "something" raises the 
terminological question whether it can be distinguished as content. 
These conscious states of affairs constitute the ultimate foundation 
of the human sciences. The question whether that which appears 
in us as a conscious state of affairs (lived experience) has a differ-
3 19 
ent mode of reality behind it as its condition lies beyond the com-
pass of what can be known reliably in the human sciences. We can 
explicate this problem by means of Kant's theory of time. From 
the critical standpoint, it does not touch upon the problem of the 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
339 
reality of time. That a temporal process appears in consciousness 
is indeed real. All relationships of expectation and fulfillment, of 
desire and satisfaction, encompass temporal succession. Real life, 
as we know it, is in time. Kant's problem concerns only conditions 
for states of affairs that appear in consciousness, and these lie be-
yond the reliable knowledge of the human sciences. 
If we want to hold a lived experience in our attention, then an 
act of gathering is also required. Accordingly, this is a condition 
for every distinct consciousness of an experienced state of affairs; 
thus all apprehension of lived experiences as the foundation for 
psychological knowledge presupposes the operations of apprehen-
sion. That such apprehension only relates what is already related 
in lived experience is the condition for the objectivity of all psy-
chological apprehension. Thus psychology already refers back at 
its point of entry to the logico-epistemological. 
We now want to show in what sense the knowledge of lived 
experiences can be attributed with reality and objectivity. But we 
must immediately add, of course, that what is directly experience-
able for the purpose of establishing a science is only very limited. 
There is infinitely more contained in the domain of expressions of 
lived experiences and of the concepts about them that exceeds the 
boundaries of what is accessible to deliberate psychological obser-
vation. We will see how knowledge of the structural nexus can be 
only partially and incompletely based on such lived experiences 
and how it is embodied in such expressions and concepts as origi-
nate from the involuntary and unobserved psychic process. For 
deliberate attention to these operations changes and banishes the 
energy, indeed, even the direction, of the operations themselves. 
We are dependent on interpretation of the creations of the human 
spirit as a means of saying what there may be in lived experience .... 
A significant supplement to lived experience, through which the 
richness and scope of psychic life is first elevated to knowledge, 
lies in the fact that something inner attains expression in some-
thing outer and can then be understood retrospectively from it. 
The outer expresses the inner either by arbitrary convention or 
by a natural lawlike expressive relation. 
In both cases we have an external sign for a state-of-affairs. 
320 
The first relationship also exists where a sign as the presence of 
a fact merely signifies the presence of another external fact. Here 
too understanding really takes place; namely, through the sign, 
knowledge about a state of affairs contained in consciousness A is 
turned into knowledge in consciousness B on the basis of arbitrary 
340 
APPENDIX 
agreement. The fact that a train approaches the station and the 
fact that a signal is given are two external facts, but agreement 
about their connectedness places a communicating consciousness 
in an inner relation to an understanding consciousness, and it is 
just this that allows one external process to become the sign for 
another. It is different with those signs that are the natural expres-
sion of something inner and therefore manifest it. 
We must also distinguish the relationship of something inner to 
actions that change the state of affairs or give rise to lasting insti-
tutions. Actions and their lasting external effects continually help 
us to reconstruct the inner reality from which they have emerged. 
Prussian Common Law originated as a means of governing the life 
of a specific era by specific laws, but scholars dealing with the age of 
Frederick employ it for the purpose of understanding the spirit of 
this period. From legal rules, the scholar works back to the inten-
tion of the legislator, and from this to its spiritual conditions. Thus 
we understand the evaluations of life-relationships, the goals, and 
the sense of obligation that coexist at a specific time and place as 
an inner reality that we find expressed in institutions as their outer 
manifestation. It speaks to us unintentionally: deeds occurred in 
the stress and strain of wanting to bring something about, not out 
of the desire to communicate something to contemporaries or suc-
cessors. They are there as signs of an inner reality that once exis-
ted, as the remaining vestiges of it. 
Quite different is the sphere of expression that emerges from the 
need in some way to express something inward and in some way 
to set it down for oneself or to communicate it to others. This is 
the proper province of understanding and of its technical applica-
tion in interpretation. Whether it be the replicas that still provide 
us with a glimmer of the Zeus of Phidias or of Durer's Apocalypse 
or of the Ninth Symphony, a drama or a philosophical system, a 
poem by Goethe or the main mathematical and scientific work of 
Newton- indeed, whether it be a single creation or a network of 
3 21 
concepts that expresses some state of affairs- there is always 
something external that came about as the expression of some-
thing inner and raises the latter to the level of understanding. 
The result of this relation is that here the inner goes over into 
the outer quite differently than in human actions. Every action is 
governed by specific conditions whose relationship to the living 
totality of the acting person produces its sense of purpose, its en-
ergy, its means, and if it is of longer duration, its adaptation to 
circumstances. What we can infer from action about inner life is 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
341 
thus limited. Actions are conceived contextually. Memoranda, de-
cisions, speeches, in short, every type of utterance that advances 
the course of action, come about not from the need to manifest 
something but from the will to produce or influence; they are part 
of political action. Accordingly, we witness a manifold of voli-
tional results that correspond to each other. Together they produce 
a nexus of life. The more situations they reflect, the richer the 
understanding of the inner life from which they arose. Neverthe-
less, they are always only excerpts and glimpses that show parts of 
a landscape, and we never survey their essential articulation. 
Now let us consider the totality of what Goethe published in 
art, literature, and science, and what is to be found in his un-
published writings. How different is the relation here between ex-
pression and inner life! The task of understanding this inner life 
can here be solved, in a certain sense, better than Goethe under-
stood himself. Subsequently, we will offer a detailed account of the 
procedure by which this occurs. At this point it is a question of 
drawing the consequences for our problem that concerns supple-
menting the direct apprehension of lived experiences in the ob-
served subject by inner experiences or by observations of human 
subjects in experimental situations. 
First, whatever can be apprehended in lived experience is com-
pleted in scope by observation or memory. What can we possibly 
know by observation and memory, or even by experiment, about 
the process of judgment? We must analyze its expression in propo-
sitions in order to grasp it. 
Second, even when lived experience can be grasped, its full im-
port comes only through understanding. If all we had were the 
personal testimonies of poets about their creativity because all 
their works were lost, how little these testimonies would tell us! 
We must analyze their works in order to penetrate the core of the 
creative process, to grasp it in its entirety. 
Third, we grasp uniformities of psychic life by linking observa-
322 
tion, memory, experiment, and understanding. (See the "First 
Study" [this volume, 23-44].) 
Fourth, the comprehension of the structure of the psychic life 
depends above all on the interpretation of the works in which the 
psychic nexus attains complete expression. Here the most encom-
passing expression, language itself, provides the most fruitful dis-
closures. (See Husserl's concept of pure grammar. What expres-
sions can teach us about structural relations: joy about something, 
desire for something, knowledge of something.) 
342 
APPENDIX 
I have maintained that under certain circumstances, structural 
relations, although minimally noticeable, can nevertheless be ap-
prehended in memory without being directly observed. The most 
important means for apprehending them, however, lies in express-
ing them, as can be ascertained in the products of language. I take 
in the structural course of the life of feeling from its initial stir-
rings, by proceeding through the parts of a felt sequence till a 
consciousness of its fullness is reached. I note the realization of a 
concept on the basis of intuitions. Or I grasp the connection be-
tween a feeling and its object or the progression from feeling to 
desire. Everywhere here ... 
Supplements to and Continuation of First Chapter 
I 
Through the continual exchange of what has been experienced 
and understood with what has been expressed in judgments and 
concepts, the conviction that the former is adequately re-presented 
in the latter receives constant reenforcement. 
In empirical consciousness, the subject is certain of its own real-
ity and of the actual existence of external things and other per-
sons. Life proceeds in terms of the relations of these constituents 
of life. The feeling of being alive, of existing, is based on their 
reality. The self is affected by the outer world and exerts its recip-
rocal effect on things and people. Experience arises on the basis of 
empirical consciousness. Its objects are the psychic nexus, external 
things, and persons who are given to us from without. Experience 
presupposes both the reality of these things and of the relations 
between them; they are the constituents of empirical conscious-
ness. The human sciences, just as much as the natural sciences, 
develop on the basis of empirical consciousness and embody the 
conviction that the constituents of empirical consciousness are 
323 
real. But philosophy generates a critique of these presuppositions. 
Critique is as old as the study of philosophy itself and accom-
panies the entire development of the sciences of experience. This 
critique is joined by one originating from within the natural sci-
ences, which undermines the conviction that sense qualities have 
objective reality. Thus the natural sciences generate a split between 
the given sense world as phenomenal and a supplementary order 
of hypothetical law-governed entities needed for the explanation 
I. SUPPLEMENTS TO THE STUDIES 
343 
of the former. The presupposition of objects independent of a sub-
ject still remains in effect, but they are now found in the supple-
mentary order of law-governed entities. By contrast, the human 
sciences remain wholly and entirely on the level of empirical con-
sciousness. No phase develops from the experiences proper to 
these sciences that leads to doubt about the reality of the three 
constituents of life and the validity of knowing them. The human 
sciences also need the presupposition of the reality of a world that 
is independent of the self. They must assume some type of re-
presentation of it through sense perceptions; but because they pro-
ceed from there .... 
2 
From the outset I have focused on the fact that the expressiOn 
("spiritual or human sciences")
11 is not entirely suitable. But every 
other term that has been employed for this group of sciences leads 
to considerable difficulties. This includes the recent and often used 
designation "cultural sciences." 
12 This term contains an unprov-
able, and indeed, one-sided determination about a sense and a 
goal of history. This is an altogether too friendly and benevolent 
concept of the human essence, in which the dark instincts of sup-
pression and destruction play a very considerable role. 
11 Geisteswissenschaften. 
12 Kulturwissenschaften. 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION OF 
THE HISTORICAL WORLD 
r. THE LoGICAL SYsTEM IN THE HuMAN SciENCES 
I begin the formation of the historical world in the human sciences 
from an epistemological perspective. The first question concerns 
the logical system that exists here. For without the analysis of the 
logical relations that exist in the human sciences, how could we 
possibly attain an understanding of the operations whose coopera-
324 
tion produces the formation of the historical world? They presup-
pose the logical operations that jointly produce all knowledge. An 
indubitable solution to this problem is made possible by descrip-
tive-analytic psychology and its theory of structure. 
Psychic Structure 
I 
The course of psychic life consists of processes. Each one begins 
and changes in time; even when I make a cross section somewhere 
in the sequence of a life-course and seem to come upon a psychic 
state, it is only the fixation of a determinate phase of conscious-
ness through attentiveness that creates the illusion of permanence. 
Who is not familiar with the irregularity and apparent fortuitous-
ness of the flow of psychic life? A harmonic arrangement of notes 
produces a feeling of pleasure; then a visual perception imposes 
itself onto this calm, aesthetic enjoyment, and revives certain 
memories that produce a desire; this desire is then suppressed on 
grounds of a judgment based on a fear of the consequences of 
satisfaction. Such restless change continues as the most divergent 
kinds of processes relieve one another- generated from within, 
conditioned from without. In the search for uniformities in all this 
motley change, I find two types. If I isolate particular activities like 
association, fusion, reproduction, and appreciation from the nexus 
of processes, then I can inductively establish uniformities. Thus 
rules of dependence can be established according to which the re-
production of our representations is determined by the interest 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
345 
and attention with which impressions have been assimilated and 
their representations reproduced, by the complexity of these repre-
sentations and the frequency of their recurrence. Such uniformities 
correspond to the laws of change in the outer world of nature. 
They permit the course of psychic life to be explained through 
hypotheses. From such inferred regularities of explanative psy-
chology, I distinguish those regularities that I call the structure of 
the psychic nexus. This nexus contains within itself a stable system 
of relations between its elements. It is comparable to the anatomi-
cal structure of a body. It consists of a regular arrangement of the 
constituents of the psychic nexus. The relations in this system are 
those of parts in and to a whole. They are experienceable in a 
325 
sense that I will presently define in more detail. Such structural 
relations can exist between lived experiences that are far apart. 
Thus a resolution wherein I predelineate a life-plan for myself can 
be linked structurally with a long series of actions that emerge 
thereafter over many years and in wide intervals. The attribute of 
structure is of the highest importance. Because life proceeds in 
temporal processes, each of which fades into the past, formation 
and development are possible in it only because the corruptibility 
of each process is overcome by a nexus that closely connects what 
is temporally separated, and thus makes possible that the past is 
conserved and what is fleeting becomes consolidated in ever more 
stable forms. The whole of a life-course is a structural nexus of 
lived experiences that, however remote they may be from each 
other in time, are articulated from within and connected as a 
unity. 
2 
Let us analyze structure. 
Every lived experience contains within it a structural relation of 
its parts. It always involves a relation of attitude to a content. The 
distinction between attitude and content is justified by the fact 
that attitude does not control content, and content does not con-
trol attitude. They are independent variables. I perceive a color, 
make a judgment about it, take pleasure in it, and want to pro-
duce it; here the same content is subjected to different attitudes. At 
the same time, each of these attitudes can be related to various 
colors and also to different objects. That which can be separated 
in this way is linked in lived experience as a structural unity. In a 
judgment there is thinking about something and something is as-
APPENDIX 
serted about an object; in a feeling, what I feel pleasure or displea-
sure about is related to this felt attitude; and in the lived experi-
ence of willing, the representation of an object is that at whose 
realization the volitional attitude is directed. Whatever is conjec-
tured or asserted, felt, wished or willed- whether it be a word or 
a determinate content- is always there solely in an attitude, and 
the attitude only exists as an attitude toward contents. 
Just as the manifold of contents is limitless- it is after all com-
posed of all the varied objects in this world to which we are re-
lated in our attitudes- there is also a manifoldness of attitudes. 
Each attitude is subject to an indeterminate number of modifica-
tions and nuances. They stand in relationships of greater and lesser 
3 26 
distance. The objective apprehension of a machine, the feeling 
about the death of a loved one, and the will to actualize a purpose 
are different not only relative to their object but also in their atti-
tude toward it; and they are expressed as different: conceptualiz-
ing the various relations between content and attitude that occur 
in these cases merely makes distinct what is inherent in lived expe-
rience. In lived experience itself there is no interest in establishing 
distinctions and relations concerning what it contains; lived expe-
rience takes place without that kind of reflection. However, for 
what is contained in lived experience to become conscious, one 
needs merely to distinguish and relate on the basis of some inter-
est. These activities simply make clear, as we shall see later, what 
was already contained in lived experience. It will be shown that 
difference, degree of affinity, and relation are not natural qualities 
of objects. They are formal categories in which operations that 
precede discursive thought and that form its basis are conceptually 
explicated, although these operations as such merely ascertain 
what is contained in sense apprehension and lived experience. In-
ner experience is completed by being expressed in language. The 
lived experience of such attitudes is expressed by various linguistic 
designations. I notice something; I make a judgment about it; I 
find pleasure in it; I want something. In these and a hundred similar 
word combinations, we express lived experiences without reflect-
ing on the inner relation that attains expression in it. However, 
when someone uses these expressions, I understand immediately 
what is going on in him, and I can better attain consciousness of 
the attitude· inherent in lived experience through the fixed expres-
sion than through the lived experience itself. I merely distinguish 
and relate what was meant by the expression and, accordingly, 
what was present in lived experience. Poetic verses and the narra-
tives of historians, available from earliest times and prior to all 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
347 
psychological reflection, depict, whether in word or song, lived 
experiences in their characteristic peculiarities. They allow some-
thing objective to be seen; they bring out the attitude toward the 
object; they explicate their relations; they teach us to distinguish 
them. As much as they arise from intense experiencing, they can 
also express it. 
Distinguishing determinate types among varying attitudes to-
ward the factual world will never be done in such a way as to 
reach total agreement. One must be clear about what sense such 
differentiation can have in a theory of structure. It differentiates 
types of relations and changing attitudes. It has nothing to do, 
therefore, with classifying psychic life in terms of faculties, powers, 
or functions. It neither asserts nor disputes such faculties. Sim-
327 
ilarly, the concept of attitude is applied only in this sense of types 
of relations that appear regularly in each psychic nexus. Indeed, it 
does not even exclude the assumption that the psychic life of hu-
manity or of the individual starts at a more simple level from 
which an abundance of structural relations emerges. Such a differ-
entiation of attitudes merely signifies a pattern of overlapping atti-
tudinal nuances in accordance with certain typical, basic stances. 
It has been shown that we can experience different attitudes to 
contents and that they can be re-experienced in the understanding 
of expressions. With these distinctions comes an awareness of dis-
tance; we know of their more proximate or more remote relations. 
Philosophical reflection on this has always distinguished certain 
basic stances. This has led to the positing of faculties, functions, 
and the a priori division of the basic attitudes of the soul as well 
as the familiar disputes about them. But since, in fact, the constit-
uent parts of the series of attitudes overlap each other, I dare 
merely attempt the selection of certain types, and I offer the fol-
lowing reasons for my scheme. Objective apprehension, on the 
one hand, and feeling or willing, on the other, are only akin in that 
they are attitudes. If the apprehension of an object and the judg-
ment about it differ despite what mediates between the two, they 
are nevertheless united by the fact that all objective apprehension 
has to do exclusively with contents and their relations as con-
tained in the given and as explicated in discursive thought. And 
throughout the range of judgments about reality, whenever one 
also considers the relation of the particular judgment to the total-
ity of thought, the assertion of validity is simply a transformation 
of the certainty about reality that belongs to the empirical con-
sciousness of sense perception and to lived experience. And al-
though feeling and willing tend to coexist in a productive nexus of 
APPENDIX 
transitions, e.g., from the feeling that a situation is unbearable to 
the decision to change it, there is also a realm of feelings such as 
aesthetic ones that, even when they are powerful and not sub-
jected to inhibitions, do not lead to action. Since the issue here is 
the foundation of the human sciences, the justification for differ-
entiating between types of objective apprehension, types of feeling, 
and types of willing lies in the fact that the division of reality, 
values, and ends pervades the whole domain of human spirit. It is 
328 
possible that re-presentation and expression manifest differences 
in lived experiences that do not possess the same distinctness in 
self-observation. 
3 
The various types of relation exert an influence on each other; one 
gives rise to the other. Images offered by the senses or thoughts 
about them arouse feelings of satisfaction, or the expansion and 
fulfillment of our being, and these bring about the striving and the 
resolve of the will to preserve a state of mind. This mode of influ-
ence, which leads from objective apprehension to feeling and from 
there to willing and acting, falls within the scope of inner experi-
ence, and thus a knowledge of the structural nexus comes about. 
This very efficacy is experienced; if it were not experienced, then it 
would not find as direct and as powerful an expression in poetry 
and history. What is given is not a regular sequence of particular 
states and some inferred causal nexus but the power of exerting 
influence, the irresistibility with which an object that has been ap-
prehended sets all the feelings in tempestuous motion; the irre-
sistibility with which someone, defying all reason, is bewitched, as 
it were, and compelled to seize the object of these feelings. The 
abysses of human life, which disclose themselves in these compul-
sions, and the modes of being spellbound or enslaved are the ob-
ject of the religious teachings of Buddha, Paul, and Augustine, as 
well as of the literary works of the great tragedians, regardless of 
their different world-views. Their forceful expression can only be 
created from the depths of lived experience. That is, our knowl-
edge of the efficacy and productivity that makes the real life-
system accessible to us does not derive from logical inferences. 
Our experience of particular [psychic] contexts or systems is only 
piecemeal, but through memory and reflection about them they 
are connected into one structural nexus. In one stroke we survey 
the connectedness of memories from our earlier life. How clearly a 
lyrical poem can show the advance from a represented situation to 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
349 
a sequence of feelings, which often occasion striving or action! Or 
in the productive system based on the typical patterns of speech, 
the exposition of a state of affairs gives rise to a world of feelings 
in us and leads us from there to a practical stance. In this way, the 
meaning of the relationships of lived experience, expression, and 
understanding is increasingly disclosed to us. What appears in 
lived experience without reflection is elicited, so to speak, from the 
depths of psychic life in expression. For expression wells up di-
329 
reedy from the psyche without reflection, and its stability allows it 
to stand the test of understanding. Thus expression contains more 
of lived experience than introspection can. 
13 
4 
Another system that relates lived experiences is incorporated in 
this structural nexus, one that appears among the typical attitudes 
but possesses an analogous characteristic everywhere in them. It 
manifests the hierarchy in which the particular manifold givens 
that are conditioned by the outer world are made to adapt to the 
goals of human spirit. It involves a hierarchy, because in it the given 
is retained, although in a higher form of consciousness. The con-
tingent becomes a constituent of a system that is independent of 
contingency, of impulses from the outside, and of associations 
from within. The particular becomes a part of a whole or an in-
stance of a universal; the ephemeral is raised to the level of an 
enduring configuration; the image is submerged in the object and 
in the concept, feeling in value. Similarly, from the volitional expe-
rience of obligation, the norm arises, and obscure strivings are 
clarified in a purpose. The flow of life, in which everything disap-
pears into the past, is overcome by memory, and the contingency 
of the event is overcome by the system of thought. 
A third type of structural relationship is important for the pro-
gression of human spirit toward the stable and the necessary. We 
have already explained how lived experience, expression, and un-
derstanding are structurally related. Expression adds stability to 
lived experience. Something created from its content comes to 
stand over against the lived experience as external, independent, 
and enduring. All attitudes allow of expression: thus expression 
seizes the stuff of reality in order to find in it a medium for under-
standing; feeling manifests itself in countenance and gesture, and it 
11 For the intelligibility of what follows, I have taken some central materials from 
the "First Study" in Part I. But their justification can only be found there. (D) 
350 
APPENDIX 
finds symbols in words and tones; the will attains fixed expression 
in precepts and laws. The human spirit objectifies itself in these 
ways. Although such objectifications are outside of it, they are its 
creations. The relationship of expression and understanding ex-
pands the existence of spirit immeasurably in the reciprocal com-
munication of individuals that produces the human community. 
The teleological character of the structural nexus is evident 
throughout. Its purposiveness is immanent and subjective. It does 
330 
not realize a purpose prescribed by nature or God; nor does the 
structural nexus produce a determinate goal: it involves only goal-
directedness. This purposiveness is not hypothetical; rather, it is 
experienced. Impressions of reality and thought about them pro-
duce pressure, pain, dissatisfaction, and disapproval and arouse 
resistance; by contrast, the expansion of existence, joy, and sympa-
thy determine the will to stand firm and to gain strength. Thus the 
nexus of processes already manifests a goal-directedness that 
moves forward as a striving inherent in the psychic nexus to bring 
about a more suitable state- that is, more suitable solely from the 
viewpoint of this individual psychic nexus- not in an objective 
sense. Psychic structure is purposive because it possesses the ten-
dency to produce, to preserve, and to augment life-values and to 
exclude whatever is indifferent or inimical. However, every life-
experience teaches how a definite direction within this goal-direct-
edness first appears in the development of the individual. The sat-
isfaction of a desire, the expansion of existence, peace and security 
of mind, perfection, and duty- these are merely instances of the 
infinite variety of individual direction. And we see the very same 
purposiveness at work in the progression of the forms of appre-
hension leading to an ever more appropriate grasp of the given 
and an ever more rigorous classification of particular objects in a 
logical system. 
Now let us look beyond the context of the present into the 
stance of human spirit toward its past and its future. The struc-
tural nexus is not simply pointed backwards into our memory and 
its unchangeableness; it presses unremittingly- and this is its most 
dominant characteristic- from out of the past and the present, 
reckoning with the future, playing with images, but also striving. 
The lived experience that involves such striving simultaneously en-
compasses constraint and freedom- never inferentially, but in a 
lived way. It is determined by the present and the past, by the way 
life shapes and patterns itself with reference to the sphere of possi-
bilities. Every forward-directed striving involves this. And since 
laws not grounded in our nature are powerless against this striv-
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
351 
ing, and since our nature is subject to the law of structure, the 
question arises how our ideals are grounded in this structural nexus 
and <Thow they) come about. 
At first the theory of structure creates the following problem for 
the logic of the human sciences: How are life and re-experiencing 
related to conceptual thought? Life and re-experiencing form the 
groundwork and constant background for logical operations; nev-
331 
ertheless, passions, sacrifice, and the surrender of the self to objec-
tivity are impenetrable to the intellect. Lived experience can never 
be fully resolved into concepts, but its dark, deep tonality accom-
panies, even if merely marginally, all conceptual thought in the 
human sciences. By contrast, the stages of consciousness are the 
technique of structure, so to speak, whereby throughout its var-
ious formations, human spirit attains sovereignty over itself and 
the world. The stages are the same in the psychic nexus and in the 
sphere of objective apprehension directed at the former. Here 
thought has insight into its object, and intellectualism finds the 
source of its productive force. With the Enlightenment, intellec-
tualism leaves behind what is impenetrable about lived experience 
as the dregs of life, and then, in Hegel, it undertakes to resolve 
what is living into concepts and to re-create a conceptual system 
by new means. But this intellectualism always provokes the reac-
tion of those who live intensely and sense life's productive force 
with incomprehensible immediacy- consider Rousseau's opposi-
tion to the Enlightenment, and that of Schelling and Feuerbach to 
Hegel. We will continue to take note of this problem of the rela-
tion of life to logical thought. It will become more evident when 
we proceed to the structural system inherent in objective appre-
hension and from there to the way this attitude is specified in the 
natural and in the human sciences. 
2. fRAGMENTS TOWARD A THEORY OF STRUCTURE 
Psychic Life 
Psychic life is something unfathomable. Whoever is concerned with 
the human sciences simply must, at some point, have strained to 
plumb this inexhaustible source. A science and certainly a single 
science of psychic life with its ever new scope and boundlessness does 
not exist. Conceptual cognition has several approaches available to it. 
The approach that stands closest to psychic life is anthropology, 
because it aims to penetrate the concrete nexus of mental life itself, 
332 
352 
APPENDIX 
antecedent to the interpretation of the creations of human spirit or 
history. Only ideal re-presentation can render such a nexus harmo-
nious. Every real explication will contain within it some contradictory 
aspect due to the awareness of singularity and the suffering caused by 
its limits; it will also contain satire, humor, or tragedy. Anthropology 
always gives just an artist's glimpse into psychic life; it invites artistic 
delineation that catches sight of individuals, periods, nations. 
Structure 
Nothing is more delicate or more short-lived than the core mo-
ment of psychic life when it attains a state of equilibrium and 
harmony in which wishes are stilled and the beauty of the soul 
becomes a reality. All desire seems fulfilled then, the will is si-
lenced. It is a point of rest in the instability of life. The otherwise 
animated psyche now presents a crystal clear and bright surface. 
But only for a moment, and then this harmony between the exter-
nal world and the life of feeling is gone. Again there is desire for 
what is not, and whether it be in conceptual cognition or in overt 
action, the tension of willing occurs again. Here is the proper seat 
of the vitality of the psychic life. 
External World 
The external world expresses itself in life as pressure through the 
relation of impulse to resistance. Its reality lies only in this life-
relationship. Its reality signifies nothing else but these relations to 
psychic structure within the human sciences. Consequently, it in-
volves nothing transcendent over against consciousness. 
A very different world of categories pertains to the natural sci-
ence conception of external objects: hypotheses, etc. 
And here it also is the case that in the given itself, only a law-
governed order can have objective validity. 
3· THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEM 
The Epistemological Problem of the Human Sciences 
On the basis of the logic of the human sciences, we can now tackle 
the epistemological problem. The analysis of logical structure must 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
353 
be presupposed by the consideration of the cognitive value of logi-
cal forms and methods. For this analysis leads to the insight that 
the forms and laws of thought inhere in the basic relationships of the 
given and of the attitude of logical thought to them. Similarly, the 
presuppositions of empirical consciousness can also be tested for 
their validity by examining the operations in which the knowledge 
of the human sciences is realized, beginning with lived experience 
and understanding, for their capacity to produce results capable of 
confirmation. It is a procedure that takes the opposite path from 
Kant in solving the epistemological problem. It does not begin by 
333 
grounding conceptual cognition on the model of formal logic and 
mathematics. Formal logic in Kant's day found the logical founda-
tion for the legitimacy of all scientific propositions in the ultimate 
abstractions of the laws and forms of thought. Kant's epistemol-
ogy deduces from this fundamental relation the claim that the 
laws and forms of thought, especially judgment, contain the con-
ditions for conceptual cognition. He supplemented these condi-
tions with mathematical conditions. And in opposition to Leibniz, 
he insisted on separating the conditions of geometry as an intuitive 
science from those of logic. 
By contrast to this, I attempt to take hold of the problem of 
conceptual cognition where it is the simplest, namely, where ob-
jects are given rather than constructed on the basis of particular 
conditionally given images, and above all where connectedness is 
given, as in lived experience. And at this point I ask, How much is 
contributed by the operation of lived experience and understand-
ing and how much by the concept-formation based on it? Only 
then can we ascertain how, under the conditions of conceptual 
cognition in mathematics and in the natural sciences, new and 
more complex tasks lead to further presuppositions. 
Accordingly, the issue is the gradual resolution of the episte-
mological problem of the human sciences, step by step through the 
determination of the scope ... 
Kant and Fichte 
How does Fichte mark the beginning of something new? He does 
so because he starts with the intellectual intuition of the ego, not 
as a substance nor as a being nor as a givenness. By means of this 
intuition, i.e., an intense preoccupation of the ego in itself as liv-
ing, he discerns its activity and energy, and accordingly explicates 
354 
APPENDIX 
dynamic concepts such as opposition and realization. With this, 
his starting point is related to the Historical School and to Goethe's 
poetry, which sees life everywhere in the capacity of the self to 
react and to develop. 
The evidence for this is that all of Fichte's polemics against 
Spinoza, Schelling, etc. have this thrust; in the second period he 
becomes even more explicit about this. 
Overcoming the Transcendence of Subjectivity 
The epistemological epoch finds its coherence in the attempt to 
develop conceptual cognition as a systematic whole in such a way 
that analysis separates the a priori from the given as a thing in 
3 34 
itself, etc.; and it ends in the collapse of this system-building and 
of the kind of cognition that is at home with transcendence every-
where, the transcendence of subjectivity and the transcendence of 
objects. Earlier I attempted to overcome the latter, and now I have 
to deal with overcoming the transcendence of subjectivity on the 
basis of my essays in psychology. 
We know of no carrier of life accessible to either ordinary or 
lived experience. Such a carrier would transcend life as such. It 
would belong to the class of concepts such as "soul" or "object" 
that transcends consciousness. Here metaphysics has been super-
seded by an epistemology and a psychology in which a new type 
of transcendence is present. I would argue that the metaphysics of 
the object and of the cosmos has been superseded by a metaphysics 
of subjectivity, and that the one is as untenable as the other. The 
earlier metaphysics of the object is based on the prevalence of the 
concept of space. It is abstracted from time, and timeless meta-
physical predicates are, so to speak, imposed on a spatial system. 
This is a product of life itself and starts at primitive levels. The 
momentary, the continually changing, that which falls prey to 
time, also characteristic of images, disappears in this metaphysical 
world picture. 
This same relation is even more strongly evident in the meta-
physics of subjectivity. The ego and the soul are timeless entities 
that have been added to experience. However, we know of noth-
ing more than what happens and have no right to supplement it 
with a carrier, because this would transpose the concept of sub-
stance onto the world of lived experience. 
All the external objects, the swords, crowns, gold, and plough-
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
355 
shares described by the historian, are merely constituents of lived 
experience. When I recall the historical events of the war with 
France that I experienced, then these public events become constit-
uents of lived experiences. As such, they belong to life itself and 
are in no way mere optical phenomena. Their reality is that of a 
life-concern that takes the impulse and resistance relationship as 
the pressure of something independent, that is, as a constraint on 
a willing subject. These relations of lived experience are expressed 
as my consciousness of the reality of events that affected me; and 
secondarily, nothing more than this is meant when I, as a historian 
of my own or of an earlier time, attach reality to the facts avail-
able to the senses. 
4· THE ENLIGHTENMENT AS AN EXAMPLE 
The Structure of the Age of Enlightenment 
The epoch preceding Leibniz confronted the dawning age of En-
lightenment with the developing sovereignty of individual German 
states, the diminution of ecclesiastical power, the rise of scientific 
culture, and as the arts had reached their nadir, the increasing at-
tempt to express religious experience in music. 
How did the structure of the new age unfold from this? What 
were its value, its importance, and its decisive purposes? How evi-
dent it becomes that the epochs of higher culture do not manifest 
parallel progress in all areas. One cannot even claim that political 
and scientific life, religion, and the arts are dominated by the same 
spirit. Not once is there a unified direction in any of these areas; 
rather, antagonisms exist everywhere. 
Yet in all the major phenomena of the epoch, the same level-
headed and realistic human spirit predominates, oriented toward 
the purposes of the world and filled by its reality. This realism is 
the product of an immense reaction that occurred when all of the 
major illusions of the Middle Ages had evaporated, and it is nur-
tured by science. If one accepts this realism in the full seriousness 
with which it involves belief in reality, then it is contained every-
where in the most characteristic phenomena of the German spirit. 
Thus invisible threads of a spiritual nature permeate every do-
main. Economic life, social stratification, and political existence 
are linked in reciprocal ways to form a coherent whole. 
The productive forces that determine this whole lie in the age of 
335 
APPENDIX 
Enlightenment itself. For ideal religious factors no longer exert a 
decisive influence, and scientific factors are on the rise. 
I. The general character of this manifold [age] ... beginning 
with Leibniz up until Frederick's death finds its initial delineation 
in the gradual dissolution of ecclesiastical faith and in the rise of 
scientific spirit. Dogmatic ecclesiastical faith, although rooted both 
in the lived experience of being in communion with God and in 
[other] religious experiences, had turned into reified concepts. 
336 
Forms of transition arise influenced by the critical challenge to the 
justification of this ecclesiastical tradition by deriving its vital 
source from lived experience and its authority and justification 
from the Bible. Therefore we see the emergence of corresponding 
sects as well as Pietism and Catholic mysticism. For its part, sci-
ence in its advance produces a consciousness of the system of na-
ture as a spatial system and as a dynamic nexus according to laws 
and as an ordering of organisms that is teleologically articulated. 
The realm of human historical spirit is not yet conceived from a 
comprehensive standpoint but is merely accounted for dogmat-
ically, relative to the particular tasks of life. 
2. It is in this connection that German intellectual life assumes 
its distinctive place. As states struggle with each other and thereby 
develop themselves, the European spirit begins to prosper in the 
interactions of nations with each other. From this a culture arises 
in which, on the basis of the fundamental opposition between con-
serving what is old and scientific progress, an infinite variety of 
directions emerge in religion, the state, and the social order. Ger-
many was the last to join this advance in politics and in culture. 
The opposition between Catholicism and Protestantism [was] 
related to this general antithesis. 
3. As far as the scientific movement extends, it requires theoreti-
cal justification of every belief, of every determination of value 
and of every purpose. It lies in the nature of the Enlightenment to 
apply this consequence from the scientific method to every part of 
life. It encompasses the whole of life with this intellectual method. 
It regulates life through the intellect. Its self-assuredness rests on 
the results of science. Thus it separates itself from the entire past, 
including its faith, tradition, revelations, and supernatural inter-
ventions. It finitizes everything and pushes divine influence further 
and further into the background .... 
At the same time, [we witness] the progress and the solidarity of 
humanity. Thought becomes the basis for enthusiasm and the ideal 
of the future. They are the product of ideas. This is the new form 
that is typical for Lessing, Frederick, and Kant. 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
357 
This world-view finds its limit in the fact that the infinite is 
pushed from life into the beyond. In life infinity exists merely as 
an emotional power that is dark and limitless. Thus it becomes the 
endless development of the individual and humanity. The world is 
emptied of gods; for progress too points toward the unending. 
3 3 7 
Accordingly, consciousness governs the fullness of life in manifold 
forms, either as lived experience of faith, or as the mystical depth 
in every life-relationship, or as inwardness in nature; at the same 
time, philosophical cognition rooted in the intellect cannot hold its 
own against criticism. But above all, life and its reflection in art 
does not want to be subordinated to the spell of rules: it wants to 
be lived on the basis of its own productive force and from the 
totality of its nature. 
4· In Germany, Protestant and Catholic culture move apart. The 
extraordinary energy of the Protestant spirit is responsible for the 
fact that the main impetus of the German Enlightenment remains 
determined by the schema of the Christian world-view. From this 
religious spirit there proceeds a continuous development that links 
the people, the clergy, the universities, and the ecclesiastical leader-
ship, allowing the Christian world-view to remain dominant in the 
midst of scientific progress. What survives the relaxation of dogmas 
is the teleological system of the universe in which man is classified 
as a teleologically conditioned being; and the critical perspective 
on the Bible that goes back to early Christianity points there as 
well. As man is assumed to have his divinely determined place, the 
doctrine of immortality is linked with it. This system includes 
Melanchthon, Leibniz, Wolff, the universal literature [of the age] 
and Kant. 
Thus we see that the German Enlightenment is supported by a 
definite conception of the meaning of life. Finding a meaning of 
life in life itself and in reflection on it is conditioned by this overall 
historical process and in turn conditions it. 
5. To the extent that the Enlightenment looks back on the past, 
its parts must seem to be stages in a progression to what has been 
attained at present. What has been attained is the correctness of 
cognition through science, taste in the arts and in life, etc. These 
all have antecedent stages. Taste is carried over from one era to 
another. The civilized state is the product .... The feeling of hu-
man worth. Here for the first time, history as a whole is illumi-
nated by science. 
Again it is an intuition of the meaning of life that emerges as 
one of the highest perspectives of historical understanding. It de-
rives everything from the overall system of the Enlightenment and 
APPENDIX 
338 
relates it back to it. Such a depletion of the past of its own pecu-
liar value represents a limited standpoint, which cannot do justice 
to the re-experiencing of history in its natural energy. We find indi-
vidual scholarship opposing the Enlightenment: first and foremost, 
the theological standpoints brought to bear by Bossuet resisted 
it. Hamann, and Herder in his early writing on history, attacked 
Schlozer, Spittler, 14 and Lessing. This was in fact the starting point 
for Herder's discovery that values are immanent in history, and 
with that he overcame the transitoriness of this standpoint. 
6. And as the ideas of this world-view are applied to the future, 
they locate all creativity, all shaping of the self, and all action on 
the world there. And through the Enlightenment, the ideas of 
progress and of communal action forge ahead into this future 
more powerfully. Advances in value-development, as they exist in 
the present, must be fulfilled. This is what happiness consists of. 
Accordingly, the concepts of purpose and ideal arise, and every 
creative act is constrained by rules or norms set by the intellect. 
Every action contains the duty to fulfill some purpose. Perfection 
somehow signifies movement toward some purpose and the duty 
to realize it. This is the core of every future-oriented activity. 
Political Life in the Age of Enlightenment 
It is common to modern nations that they advance to unified 
states from contingent political structures. This happened in 
France and England through the uniting of such structures into 
states whose parts possessed a common inner life in a common 
language and literature. It took place in Germany and Italy 
through the development of the autonomy of several states on the 
same linguistic and literary base. This was connected with a deep 
tension in the consciousness of these two nations. Even where 
there was a patriotic identification with the state, there was the 
tendency to undermine whatever was uniting the nation. What 
united the nation superficially was law. What supported and devel-
oped an inner consciousness of its communal nature was its lan-
guage, literature, science, and art. Religion was a source of frag-
mentation. No one recognized at the time of the Enlightenment 
that the Prussian state had the vocation of unifying the nation 
14 Ludwig Timotheus (Baron of) Spittler (r752-r8ro), professor of history and 
church history in Gi:ittingen, coworker at the "federation of the German Frei-
maurer"; author of Grundri/5 der Geschichte der europdischen Staat en. 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
359 
politically. This marks a peculiarity about the political character of 
this period. On the other hand, however, this state still cultivated a 
339 
kind of nationalistic fervor in its political struggles with Austria 
and France. This was shown by Gleim,
15 Lessing, etc. And when 
the military state strove to become a cultural state, whose great 
manifestations were the academies, the University of Halle, and 
Prussian Common Law, i.e., state institutions that embodied a 
new culture, a moment of universal progress could be located. The 
feeling of such progress was always there. The relations to the 
German spirit were always felt. Here we see the beginnings of an 
advance in Prussia from military state to bearer of cultural ideas, 
which was then carried further by grounding the University of Ber-
lin, by Hegel, etc. However, at the same time, this generated a 
deep conflict. On the one hand, this culture was German in a gen-
eral sense. The language, poetry, and science could not be other-
wise. The bureaucracy assimilated this general perspective- a first 
phase of national reflection that was initially not self-conscious. 
But the military nobility felt that the bureaucracy was a body alien 
to it. Even more curious was the spread of literature due to the 
triumph of Prussian heroism in the Seven-Year War. Patriotic Prus-
sian poets were internally divided. From the life of the nation that 
lacked political unity there arose an ideal of free humanity in 
Kleist, in Lessing, etc. that contradicted the enthusiasm for the 
harsh military heroism of the time, its brutal discipline, its unre-
lenting severity, and its enjoyment of battle. 
Wars between the new states caused their unity to become more 
concentrated. They tended toward autocracy and needed to de-
velop armies, finances, and administration. Here we see a new 
structure of political life. Political life does not grow, it is made. It 
is pervaded through and through by rational purposiveness. Fi-
nance, international politics, etc. function everywhere in the same 
mode. The states incorporate ever more rational purposes: the ed-
ucational system, science, and control over the churches. The 
princes are the first representatives of rational unity. Thus autoc-
racy mcreases. 
In all this lies the preparation for the sovereignty of rationality 
in Europe, which precedes the foundation of science itself. The 
free and irrational forces of loyalty, etc., are replaced by a calcul-
''Johann Wilhelm Ludwig Gleim (r7I9-r8o3), leading member of the group of 
Anacreontic poets at Halle. Rejecting both Baroque and Enlightenment attitudes, 
he wrote in a decorative, unpretentious, unidealized manner. 
APPENDIX 
able coercion by the military system, etc., that is guaranteed to be 
effective. 
Germany occupies a special place in this context. Through the 
power of the monarchy, Prussia has to fashion a unity from het-
erogeneous provinces. Armies and navies [are a] fundamental prob-
lem everywhere, but in Prussia there is the additional problem that 
the bureaucracy is the primary carrier of the communal spirit. 
340 
There is a further contrast in the development of the nations. In 
England the aristocracy rules. Their political function is all of a 
piece with the absorption of the landed property, cooperation with 
the rise of commerce, and the constitution of the cities. Therefore 
no bureaucracy develops. Education, property, and political signif-
icance are united in the aristocracy. And then a hierarchy comes 
into existence by which the aristocracy obtains overall control 
through Parliament. The new forces- commerce and industry-
are incorporated into this system by development. 
France has been building cities since the Celts and the Romans. 
Its life pulsates in the families that hold sway in the cities, in their 
local and larger districts. Education, ownership, and political au-
thority overlap in these families. This political authority is sepa-
rated from the rule of the monarch. The monarchy is weak and 
deficient in leadership. 
France is internally divided, first, by its relationship to the church, 
and second, by financial difficulties. 
In Germany, Prussia is a model of development. 
The modern state facilitates the free movement of property through 
the introduction of Roman law. This is the highest achievement of 
the Renaissance. 
France's power over Germany has diminished. She did not suc-
ceed in conquering Holland nor in advancing beyond the Rhine .... 
It was unable to hold back the growing power of Austria in the 
east. Yet advancements in political life did occur, and a stronger 
sense of self was connected with them. 
The eighteenth century brought something to fruition in Ger-
man politics, however, whose significance remained unnoticed by 
the actors on this stage and by those on the sidelines. This was the 
dissolution of the Reich. To the degree that a selection, so to 
speak, occurred in the contest between the rising rulers, a dualism 
of two growing superpowers emerged as potential hegemonial fac-
tors in Germany. 
At first, Prussia was still in competition with Saxony, Bavaria, 
and Hanover. Then Frederick the Great established Prussia's supe-
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
riority as a great power. "On the other side, the Catholic imperial 
state of Austria, which with the definitive conquest of Hungary 
perpetually keeps one head of the Double Eagle pointed eastward 
to the Hungaro/Slavic regions, the possession of which generates a 
major task that is not German but European. At the same time, 
341 
however, it also asserts its historical position in the middle and 
southern German system of states. From the conflicts which emerged 
from this, the one with Prussia was what decided the destiny of 
both states. " 16 
Here we see a relation between purpose and meaning in history 
as remarkable as it is important- a relation already evidenced in 
the life of individuals. States and princes pursue their ends in ways 
that are limited by the horizon of their times. They act for them-
selves, not for some larger whole or for history. But the meaning 
of what they do does not become visible in the nexus of history 
until a later time. It extends far beyond the ends that were set. 
There is nothing mystical in this. One does not need to invoke 
providence nor a purpose pursued by history itself. With the ad-
vance of time, the effects of purposive action become visible in 
more comprehensive contexts. Thereby they manifest themselves 
as parts of a system, which then may later appear in an even more 
encompassing one. What we see is always merely a restricted rela-
tionship of historical parts to the whole that has elapsed so far 
The decisive point, however, is that what we see is real meaning, 
even if it is a limited one. It cannot be superseded by a subsequent 
context. Therefore the historian sees truthfully. 
The Music of the Enlightenment 
If we move from the life of the state in the Enlightenment to enter 
the freer realm of German cultural life with its various hills, peace-
ful valleys, and babbling brooks where we freely yield to our own 
lived experience and imagery, then the first and decisive thing is a 
self-examination of German spirit by way of recapitulating the 
past, a disclosive profundity that relates the previous religious ep-
och with something that survives it in the present. Soon thereafter, 
we find in the works of Gluck the musical prophecy of future 
drama as well as a recapitulation of our understanding of antiq-
16 Bernhard Erdmannsdorffer (r833-19or), Deutsche Geschichte vom West-
falischen Frieden his zum Regierungsantritt Friedrichs des Gro{5en, r648-174o, II 
(Berlin: G. Grote, r892-93), p. rso. 
APPENDIX 
uity going back to Corneille and Racine. The search for the musi-
cal form of ancient drama [discloses] the basic characteristics of 
the new musical drama. And then [there are] the developments in 
Austria. All this in the midst of a wealth of songs, plays, and 
hymns. 
It was in music that German culture first found its own voice. 
At a time when the German language was still incapable of ex-
342 
pressing the ultimate depths of psychic life, music became the lan-
guage of the German mind and heart. It replaced the music of 
Italian passion. In a succession of artists whose only analogue can 
be found in [the history of] Greek sculpture, there emerges a dis-
tinctive mode of expressing hovering moods, the tensions of psy-
chic life, and the harmonious confluence of different voices in the 
world. This is achieved in those symphonies by Haydn that leave 
behind the determinacy of optical images or the strictures of words. 
Pietism 
Among the movements in which traditional forces asserted them-
selves, German Pietism was dominant. It is only a part of the Eu-
ropean-American movement of Christian religiosity. It simultane-
ously opposed Protestant state religions and the new wave of secular 
life, which no official church was able to resist. Its ultimate goal 
was the struggle against the confinement of religious energies and 
of every religious exaltation due to links with culture, state, orga-
nized religion, and science. Religious experience, and what it re-
veals, is to be liberated from all that. Its self-certainty should be 
grounded solely on the evidence of experience. This is the general 
characteristic of the religious movement that encompasses the 
movement in the Netherlands that began in the first half of the 
seventeenth century, the German Pietists and the Moravians, Meth-
odists and Irvingites, 17 the Baptists and the Quakers. It started in 
the Netherlands, where in keeping with the Calvinist ethos, it 
strove to establish a discipline against secular life in the morality 
of the convert by means of conventicles. 18 
17 lrvingites were followers of Edward Irving (1792-1834), a Scottish clergyman 
who believed in pentecostal phenomena. 
IM Dilthey refers to Ernst Troeltsch (1865-1923), German scholar and professor 
of theology at Heidelberg and of philosophy at Berlin. 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
Voetius
19 attacked the rationalist philosophy that just then man-
ifested itself in Descartes.20 Thus the inception of rationalist phi-
losophy coincides completely with the beginning of Pietism. They 
confront each other in the Netherlands. (In r643 Descartes's letter 
to Voetius, his triumphant polemical treatise, appears.) But Coc-
cejus,21 Lodensteyn/2 and Labadie23 promoted the liberation of re-
ligious experience and imagination by biblical faith and schol-
arship. Therefore we must also investigate to what extent Voetius 
is influenced by Descartes in opposing him and has a critical aware-
ness of his grounding. The same [ought to be done] with the three 
last-named individuals. RitschF4 provides relevant material but 
does not focus on this question. 
The same problem arises in connection with the German Pi-
etists. Both postulate the same relationship of intimate acquain-
tance with God as the presupposition of knowledge of the invisi-
343 
ble world. Only the convert can know anything about the invisible 
world. He alone understands the Bible, which reveals the divine 
word to him as supernaturally communicated. The convert be-
comes capable of making so-called discoveries there. The provi-
dential and the miraculous did not end with apostolic times. 
Wherever we find providential guidance and conversion, there we 
see direct acts of divine influence, and therefore miracles. They are 
connected to the Bible, but not to Protestantism. Their testimo-
nials are all authentic scriptures of the Christian religion. The true 
Christ lives amid a cloud of witnesses. From there it also follows 
that he must seek out the true believers beyond the visible church, 
which consists of both believers and unbelievers. 
It belongs to the nature of religious experience that it wants to 
1
" Gisbertus Voetius, Latin name for Gijsbert Voet (r589-r676), Dutch theo-
logian at the University of Utrecht; a Calvinist who opposed Cartesianism and 
Cocceianism. 
20 The question is whether Voetius already asserts the principle of lived experi-
ence and experiential evidence over against rationality. (D) 
21 Coccejus, Latin name for Johannes Koch (r6o3-69), German theologian; 
taught at Bremen and Leiden, where he expounded covenant theology. 
22 Jodocus van Lodensteyn ( 1620-77 ); encouraged high standards of individual 
conduct. 
23 Jean de Labadie (r6ro-74), French religious reformer; Jesuit who converted to 
Calvinism. After being excommunicated by the Calvinists in r67o, Labadie took a 
separatist group of Pietists to Germany. 
24 Albrecht Ritschl (r822-89). Dilthey is undoubtedly referring to Ritschl's Ge-
schichte des Pietismus in der reformirten Kirche (Bonn: A. Marcus, r88o). 
APPENDIX 
be supplemented by an understanding of stories about the conver-
sions and devoutness of others. It is broadened and strengthened 
by this. This leads to conventicles, propaganda, and the mentality 
of the Moravian brethren. 
A parallelism [emerges] between the Enlightenment and Pietism. 
Secular tolerance finds its counterpart in religious tolerance, which 
recognizes every true Christian faith based on conversion. The En-
lightenment attack on the magical power of the sacraments has its 
counterpart in their religious interpretation. Similarly, the natural 
law theory that every rational person has equal rights has its par-
allel in the way the equal religious worth of converts serves to 
overcome the division of civil classes through religious commu-
nion. The teleology of the Enlightenment has its parallel in a Pi-
etistic system of signs that prayers have been answered. The prop-
aganda of Pietism is countered by Enlightenment propaganda. 
The similarities reach deeper, however. For the Pietists, the ec-
clesiastical context is incapable of rehabilitating faith. The justi-
fication of faith cannot come from the church. The individual 
must seek to justify himself before God through his own lived 
experience of repentance and conversion. The true faith is the one 
that is experienced in this way. Such faith is based on the inward-
ness of lived experience in the person as creatively brought out by 
the Reformers. Therefore, Pietism is a pure response of genuine 
Protestantism. . . . But it surpasses Protestantism as the general 
movement of individualism by distancing the church still further 
from the religious process. Its greatness lies in the fact that it de-
velops and furthers the inwardness of the first Protestant move-
ment, and here lies its kinship with the Enlightenment as well. 
Pietism represents a possible religious world-view that shares the 
same historical soil as the Enlightenment. 
344 
One must distinguish Pietism completely from the spiritualistic 
developments of the Reformation. It arose from the same great 
movement as the latter; their sects and writers share a spiritual 
affinity and a historical context. But two aspects set them apart. 
The faith of Pietism is not merely developed from the Bible but 
remains bound by it. Pietism is Bible Christianity. Its relation to 
the Bible extends from the plain Bible reader/5 who seeks there the 
strength to convert as well as encouragement and assurance in the 
faith, who turns to the Bible in decisive life-situations, and who, 
under its influence, fashions new experiences and discovers his 
21 Reading Lehrer as Leser, as below. 
II. ADDITIONS TO THE FORMATION 
own experiences there, to the theologian who undertakes to dis-
cover the true system of Christology from the Bible. These two 
kinds of Bible reader are mutually related. Confessional writings 
are the teachings that come from life. In Christ and in the writings 
of the Apostles, life itself comes to us and speaks to us. 
The other aspect that separates Pietism from the Puritans or 
from Jakob Bohme lies in the fact that religiosity, as it arises in the 
individual person, remains a personal cause. Pietism seeks to pr