3
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_1, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Abstract   This essay has two parts. In the ﬁ rst one I try to show the crucial 
importance of Husserl’s phenomenology ( Logische Untersuchungen  and  Ideen I ) in 
Ortega’s thought at least till 1929. In this period it is not an exaggeration to say that 
Ortega understands his philosophy as a peculiar development of Husserl’s theory of 
intentionality. After this date, and inﬂ uenced by the publication Heidegger’s  Sein 
und Zeit , he begins to consider Husserlian thought as the last and more reﬁ ned form 
of idealism. The antidote agains it should be a philosophy of vital or historical reason, 
a form of non idealistic phenomenology, which is close to the existential one. 
The second part of the text is a personal reading of Ortega’s theory of historical 
reason, this non idealistic phenomenology, in order to see its possibilities in the 
liberal/communitarian debate about the universality of human rights and the plausibility 
for establishing a moral hierarchy of the different cultural practices. 
 The In ﬂ uence of Husserl 
 José Ortega y Gasset’s relations with Husserlian phenomenology are intense and 
problematical, intense because, as recent studies have shown, it is impossible to 
understand the very heart of Ortega’s philosophy if we do not understand the profound 
 Chapter 1 
 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights 
 Jesús  M.  Díaz Álvarez  
 J. M.  Díaz Álvarez (*)
 Department of Philosophy, Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (UNED) ,
 Madrid ,  Spain 
 Department of Spanish, San Diego University ,  Madrid ,  Spain 
e-mail:  jdiaz@fsof.uned.es 
 I thank Gema Rodríguez Trigo for her support during the preparation of this chapter. I should also 
like to express gratitude to Javier San Martín and, especially, to Jorge Brioso. Their suggestions 
and commentaries helped me to improve the essay. This text was elaborated as a part of a research 
project sponsored by the Spanish Department of Investigation, Science and Innovation (FI2009-
11707). 
4
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
in ﬂ uence of the author of  Ideen I , 1 and problematical because the Spanish philosopher 
never acknowledged these relations during his maturity. Indeed, he stated exactly 
the opposite in decisive self-interpretations. For example, in  La idea de principio 
en Leibniz y la evolución de la teoría deductiva  (1947), he says, “I abandoned 
phenomenology the moment that I received it.” 2 And in texts from the 1930s, such 
as “Preface for Germans” (1934), he said his philosophy of historical or vital reason 
was exactly the opposite of phenomenology, i.e., the last and most coherent idealist 
philosophy of the modern age. 3 
 This incipient abandonment of Husserl’s thinking and its interpretation in an 
idealist code were the two hermeneutic theses that the majority of Ortega’s closest 
and most in ﬂ uential disciples accepted uncritically and perpetuated as dogma until 
recently. This is not easy to abandon. Had not Ortega sanctioned this position on 
Husserl? Who could better narrate this history? Taking into account this situation, it 
is not surprising that most histories of philosophy and collections of readings do not 
link Ortega with the author of  Ideen . 4 
 Within the Anglo-American world, Ortega is generally situated within 
Existentialism without almost any connection with phenomenology. 5 To the German 
public, he is usually located in the neighborhood of  Lebensphilosophie . 6 And if 
this public is a Hispanic one, the situation is even worst, at least until recently. 
The reason is that the majority of Ortega’s disciples not only faithfully followed 
 1  Cf. Philip W. Silver,  Ortega as Phenomenologist: The Genesis of Meditation on Quixote 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1978); Pedro Cerezo,  La voluntad de aventura (Madrid: 
Ariel, 1984); and, particularly, Javier San Martín,  Ensayos sobre Ortega (Madrid: UNED, 1994); 
Javier San Martín,  Fenomenología y cultura en Ortega  (Madrid: Tecnos, 1998). Thanks to Ortega’s 
interest in phenomenology, it would be no exaggeration to say that Spain and the Spanish-speaking 
countries were the  ﬁ rst to translate Husserl’s main works. One of the obligatory steps for the group 
of thinkers that gathered around Ortega, the so-called “School of Madrid,” was the study of 
phenomenology. Cf., in this respect, the sharp comments of his disciple José Gaos in his splendid 
 Confesiones profesionales. Obras Completas XVII-Confesiones Profesionales . (México, D. F.: 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1982), 59–85. 
 2  José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo IX (Madrid: Taurus, 2009), 1119 (My translation 
here and hereafter). English edition: José Ortega y Gasset  The Idea of Principle in Leibnitz and the 
Evolution of Deductive Theory (New York: Norton & Company, 1971), 280. 
 3  José Ortega y Gasset, ibid., 154–60; José Ortega y Gasset, “Preface for Germans,”  Phenomenology 
and Art (New York: Norton & Company, 1975), 60–70. 
 4  Herbert Spiegelberg himself, in his monumental  The Phenomenological Movement , succumbs to 
these self-interpretations. And although he holds that Ortega is an admirer of Husserl and his main 
presenter in Spanish-speaking countries, he cannot be considered a “full- ﬂ edged phenomenologist,” 
someone who should be included “in the mainstream of the Phenomenological Movement.” 
Herbert Spiegelberg,  The Phenomenological Movement . (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 
1982), 659, 672. 
 5  Cf., among the classical readings, Walter Kaufmann,  Existentialism: From Dostoevsky to Sartre 
(New York: New American Library, 1975), 152–53. For a recent assessment of a similar line, cf. 
Charles Guignon, “History and Historicity,”  A Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism , 
eds. Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2006), 555. 
 6  Otto F. Bollnow,  Die Lebensphilosophie (Dordrecht: Springer, 1958). 
5
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
the master’s self-interpretation concerning Husserl’s phenomenology, but extended 
it to practically all other philosophical tendencies of the time. This way of reading 
Ortega ends up saying that the theory of historical reason cannot be linked, strictly 
speaking, to phenomenology in general or to any other philosophical tendency. 
The result was a consolidation of what a perceptive specialist, Pedro Cerezo, has 
called  venerational hermeneutics . 
 But this assumption of “originality” has weighed heavily. Without the links with 
the philosophy of his time, Ortega’s work is uninteresting for anyone who is not a 
specialist in his work. If it is so original and peculiar, why should someone who 
studies phenomenology, hermeneutics, or pragmatism be interested in his thinking? 
 But the most recent studies have shown the untruthfulness of Ortega’s self-
interpretation. He did not abandon phenomenology at the very moment he received it. 
Nor did he always understand Husserl’s thinking as the last and most sublime form 
of modern idealism. It is true that in 1929 Ortega began to read Husserl in this way. 
But before this date he accepts many of his phenomenological theses as precisely 
the ones that most helped idealism to collapse. In between, there is the reading of 
 Sein und Zeit (1927). 
 Let me describe Ortega’s relationship with Husserl’s phenomenology. First, 
I will discuss Ortega’s acceptance of his phenomenology up until 1929. Then I will 
focus on his later criticisms of  epochē and transcendental reduction. 
 In 1913 Ortega gave two lectures, “On the Concept of Sensation” and “Sensation, 
Construction, and Intuition,” which are the  ﬁ rst two texts in phenomenology written 
in Spanish. 7  These were for an audience not specialized in the new philosophy. Both 
re ﬂ ect considerable knowledge of the  Logische Untersuchungen and, especially 
in the  ﬁ rst one,  Ideen I . Ortega’s interest in phenomenology is also evident in refer-
ences to Theodor Conrad and Heinrich Hoffmann. 
 In 1915 and 1916, Ortega gave two university courses where Husserlian phe-
nomenology is central.  Sistema de la Psicología , held in Madrid, is an explanation 
and a personal acceptance of some key concepts: natural attitude, intentionality, 
intuition, psychologism, evidence,  epochē , reduction, essence, world/horizon. 
 Introducción a los problemas actuales de la  ﬁ losofía , held in Buenos Aires, 8 mainly 
gathers the contents of the Madrid course and in it Ortega calls his research 
“psychological phenomenology.” 9 But what is it about phenomenology that 
captivates Ortega? To answer this question, it is necessary to consider his critique 
of idealism. 
 7  Cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo I (Madrid: Taurus, 2004), 624–38, 642–52. 
English Edition: Ortega (1975), 78–115. In the “Prólogo para alemanes” (“Preface for Germans”), 
he says that he began to study “phenomenology seriously in 1912.” Cf. José Ortega y Gasset 
(2009), 155. English Edition: Ortega (1975), 61. 
 8  Cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo VII (Madrid: Taurus, 2007), 429–534, 557–
666. English Edition: José Ortega y Gasset,  Psychological Investigations (New York: Norton 
& Company, 1987). 
 9  José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo VII , 643. 
6
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
 Trained in the neo-Kantianism of Cohen and Natorp, Ortega begins to mistrust 
this philosophy in 1911 during his second stay in Marburg. The problem with 
idealism—not only in its neo-Kantian version—is its lack of radicalness. For Ortega, 
philosophy must be,  à la Husserl, a “science with no presuppositions,” a peculiar 
kind of theory whose  ﬁ nal mission is to reveal to us  radical reality , the ultimate 
foundation upon which rests our very existence, and the existence of everything. 
Idealism postulates that this reality is consciousness. However, Ortega considers 
idealistic consciousness a  hypothesis , an  assumption , a failed attempt to clarify the 
rocky ground of what is radically real. Edmund Husserl’s new philosophy will show 
this. Let us look at this brie ﬂ y. 
 According to the Spanish philosopher, there are two great conceptions of the 
ultimate foundation in the history of thought. In realism, the world is an independent 
reality that provides the reason for everything that exists. This is Ancient and 
Medieval philosophy. Subjectivity passively registers the reality of a world that 
exists completely independently of it. A proper metaphor is the wax tablet upon 
which the letters of the world are written. But starting in the Renaissance, the 
insuf ﬁ ciencies of this thesis begin to appear. This  real world faithfully registered 
by  a subject that is also real and like a wax tablet can be doubted. Our senses 
deceive us frequently. And we cannot talk about the existence of something without 
“thinking” about it. Saying that something  is is equivalent to saying that I somehow 
have it in my “thought,” broadly speaking. The Modern Age corrects “the careless-
ness of ancient times, which did not acknowledge that everything that attempts to 
exist must be an object for me, that is, it must enter into the report of consciousness.” 10 
The Moderns move radical reality from the world to consciousness. As Berkeley 
said, “ esse id est, percipi .” The new metaphor is that of a recipient that contains 
everything that there is the way a “vessel contains its contents.” Objects, in general, 
then, become  contents of consciousness . Everything becomes  content of my mind, 
a  representation  in my consciousness. Consciousness is what now enjoys and 
stipulates true reality. 
 According to Ortega, what Husserl’s notion of intentionality shows is that this 
second idea of radical reality is an  assumption that is as lacking in veracity as the 
assumption of a world that provides the reason for everything. The intentionality 
discovered by phenomenology clearly shows that the characteristic of conscious-
ness is that it opens itself to what is not itself, that is, to the world. This is not a 
representation “created” by subjectivity. This world is not made of the same “matter” 
as thought. Thought and the world belong to one another, they are strictly correlated, 
but they are different. 
 Husserl’s genius is precisely that he discovered this correlation, this original 
phenomenon that manages to go beyond both the realist thesis and the idealist 
thesis while holding on to both. The world does not swallow up subjectivity, nor 
does subjectivity swallow up the world. If we attempt to describe what is really 
there, radical reality is nothing other than  welterfahrendes Leben . Consciousness 
 10  José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo VII , 658. 
7
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
is neither a wax tablet, nor a recipient that contains the world, it is the pole of a 
correlation that opens itself up to what is not itself, to the world. Because of this, 
until 1929, Husserlian phenomenology represents for Ortega a third metaphor in 
the history of thought, the metaphor of the  Dii Consentes , the famous Etruscan gods 
who it was said could only be born and die together. There is no consciousness 
without the world and no world without consciousness. 11 
 Taking into account this general interpretation of Husserl, it is no surprise that 
Ortega during this  ﬁ rst period accepts the most relevant thesis of  Ideen I , which he 
reads as a continuation of the  Logische Untersuchungen . 12 Thus, we can only reach 
this correlation after performing  epochē , after “extricating ourselves” from the thesis 
of the natural attitude. This extrication ( Enthaltung ) from the world and later 
re ﬂ ection upon consciousness and its lived experiences allows us to clarify the 
original phenomenon: life, the ego related to circumstance, to the world, a world 
which is always understood, as is shown in his seminal  Meditaciones del Quijote 
(1914), is a horizon that presents itself in an in ﬁ nity of perspectives, with the 
philosopher’s job being to describe it truthfully. 13 The most mature expression of 
these issues is in  ¿Qué es  ﬁ losofía? (1929). Written clearly in Husserl’s orbit, it also 
marks the beginning of Heidegger’s in ﬂ uence, which is largely the motivation 
behind Ortega’s later criticism of the  Ideen . 14 
 To summarize, until 1929, Ortega accepts the fundamental thesis of Husserl’s 
phenomenology with no problem. While it is true that there is a de ﬁ cient under-
standing of certain elements of the phenomenological architectonic, 15 he captures 
and, more importantly, shares what is essential: the a priori of intentional correlation, 
the perfect and necessary correlation of ego and the world (circumstance). This is 
radical reality, life. 
 11  Regarding the  Dii consentes as a metaphor of the new philosophy, cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  ibi-
dem , 476, 662. 
 12  This continuation between  Ideen I and  Logische Untersuchungen is a quite personal reading that 
can sometimes lead him to certain errors. Cf. footnote 15. 
 13  Note that  Meditaciones del Quijote , a work that contains the nucleus of his philosophy, was 
published in 1914, right between the two essays on phenomenology from 1913 and the two courses 
in Madrid and Buenos Aires on this same subject (1915 and 1916). In this sense, it is very signi ﬁ cant 
that the maxim with which Ortega’s philosophy is usually identi ﬁ ed appears in this beautiful text: 
“I am myself and my circumstance and if I do not save my circumstance, I do not save myself.” 
This maxim is nothing more than the expression and personal acceptance of the a priori of inten-
tional correlation. Nor is it by chance that, in 1916, Ortega began to write a series of essays under 
the general heading of  El espectador . In these we  ﬁ nd sharp phenomenological descriptions of 
human life in the most varied situations. Cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  Meditations on Quixote (New 
York: Norton & Company, 1961). 
 14  Cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo VIII (Madrid: Taurus, 2008), 235–374. English 
Edition: José Ortega y Gasset,  What is Philosophy? (New York: Norton & Company, 1960). 
 15  One of the most notable misunderstandings affects the clear differentiation between eidetic 
reduction and transcendental reduction. Rather frequently, but not always, phenomenology is 
identi ﬁ ed with the “intuition of essences,” in the fashion of realist phenomenology. Cf., for exam-
ple, José Ortega y Gasset (2004), 652. 
8
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
 The  ﬁ rst text in which Ortega explicitly criticizes Husserlian phenomenology is 
“Regarding Phenomenology” (1929). 16 From this date onward, Ortega reiterates his 
refutation and he never retracts it. Although there are certain variations, the main 
axis of his refutation states that epochē and transcendental reduction turn phenom-
enology into an idealism at the peak of Cartesianism. 17 
 Ortega says that consciousness is, on principle and as Husserl himself acknowl-
edges, positing ( setzend ), i.e., an enacting consciousness ( vollziehendes ). And what 
it posits or performs is the world. But if before 1929 phenomenology discovered this 
correlative structure through extrication ( epochē ) from the world (the realist thesis) 
and by the re ﬂ ective return (reduction) to the experiences of consciousness in which 
this world manifests itself, now  epochē and reduction cease to be operations that 
allow us to discover intentionality and do the exact opposite: they suspend it. The 
 epochē  and reduction break the intentional correlation of direct positing conscious-
ness and replace it with re ﬂ ective consciousness, which is held to be  absolute . 
 By suspending the performance and turning its eyes back on itself, this con-
sciousness dissolves the very reality of the world, transforming it into pure contents 
of consciousness, into representation, into “thought.” Consciousness and world are 
once again made of the same “matter.” Phenomenology is now one more example 
of the metaphor of the recipient. But if phenomenology holds the re ﬂ ective con-
sciousness, not the direct positing consciousness, to be absolute and primary, it 
falsi ﬁ es the original phenomenon, the idea that what is primary is the life that expe-
riences the world, the consciousness that posits or enacts the world. 
 In other words, from 1929 onwards, Ortega understands that the re ﬂ ective process 
that accompanies  epochē and reduction radically distorts the primary datum, the 
ego-world correlation, positing a re ﬂ ective consciousness as foundation. Thereafter, 
Ortega no longer uses the metaphor of the  Dii Consentes  which, before this date,  ﬁ t 
phenomenology and his own philosophy, insofar as it was phenomenological; the 
Etruscan gods are no longer linked to Husserl. 18  Ortega maintained this rejection 
with very few nuances to the end of his life. 
 A Non-idealistic Phenomenology  
 Above we saw that from 1929 onward, Ortega y Gasset distanced himself from 
Husserlian phenomenology, which he considered to be the ultimate and most 
perfect embodiment of idealism.  Everything that was identi ﬁ cation with Husserl 
 16  José Ortega y Gasset (2008), 177–87. 
 17  Some of the most notable texts containing this accusation are:  ¿Qué es la vida? Lecciones del 
curso 1930–1931 ;  Principios de metafísica según la razón vital. Curso de 1932–1933 ;  Prólogo 
para alemanes ;  La idea de principio en Leibniz y la evolución de la teoría deductiva . The  ﬁ rst two 
appear in José Ortega y Gasset (2008), 417, 639. The second two appear in José Ortega y Gasset 
(2009), 154–60, 1119–20. 
 18  For the exclusion of the metaphor of the  Dii Consentes  from phenomenology, cf. José Ortega y 
Gasset (2009), 158. 
9
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
before this date became disidenti ﬁ cation afterwards . But what is very interesting in 
Ortega’s new opinion is that he distanced himself from phenomenology through 
 ﬁ delity to its basic thesis: the a priori of intentional correlation, the strict ego-world 
correlation. From that date onward, he believes that Husserlian phenomenology 
itself betrays this discovery. Because of this, beyond the possible plausibility of the 
Spanish thinker’s criticism of  epochē and reduction, what is clear is that he shares 
this basic thesis. In effect, his philosophy of vital or historical reason is nothing 
other than successive developments based on the aforementioned ego-world or, 
to use his own vocabulary, the “ego-circumstance” correlation. He will call this 
correlation life, life as primary datum, as radical reality, and the Spanish thinker 
himself recognizes in some of the aforementioned texts concerned with the criti-
cism of Husserl’s phenomenology that his path to this concept of life is strictly 
linked with what he considers a  non-idealistic understanding of phenomenology. 19 
Thus Ortega should rightfully be interpreted as an original phenomenologist and his 
philosophy a major, creative contribution within this tradition. Even considering his 
mature interpretation of Husserlian thinking, what he also does after 1929 is, in its 
own words, a type of phenomenology, one which is actually closer in some aspects 
to Heidegger or “existential phenomenology” than Husserl. 
 This is not the place to explain the main features of his non-idealistic phenome-
nological philosophy, but in order to understand better the second part of the article 
I would like to say something about it. 
 As I expressed before, the concept which Ortega uses to capture the primary 
datum, the radical reality, is the concept of life. And life, as we already know, is 
nothing other than the strict intentional correlation between the “I” and the world. 
Taking into account this point of departure, the Spanish thinker tried to give details 
of the essential characteristics of this structure in some of his most outstanding 
books and university courses, but he never achieves this goal in a satisfactory way. 
In any case, when Ortega tries to explain the “attributes of life” he always insists 
 ﬁ rst of all is the idea that life is not a type of substance, something which has the 
characteristics of “things.” On the contrary, life is a process, the constant activity of 
an “I” in its surroundings, in the world. 
 If we examine, now, very brie ﬂ y the two components of Ortega’s concept of life, 
we can recognize the following characteristics. Concerning the world, the Spanish 
philosopher will understand it as a horizon. He will also insist in its vital aspect. For 
Ortega, world is really  life world, understood primarily as a cultural-historical world, 
as a set of pragmatic  ﬁ elds. The world is  ﬁ rst of all a system of “tools,” interpreting 
this word in a broad sense, which offers us a series of possibilities and denies others. 
 If we consider now the other pole of the correlation, the “I,” we can say that if the 
world was for Ortega  life- world, the “I” is also primary and essentially an  incarnate 
being-in-the-world . The “I” only makes sense in the pragmatic and historic-cultural 
net which surrounds it. It is there where the “I” must make choices concerning its 
 19  Cf. José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo IX (Madrid: Taurus, 2009), 160. English 
Edition: “Preface for Germans,” 70. 
10
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
own being. In other words, the “I,” whether it knows it or not, is choosing all the 
time in the circumstances into which it has been thrown. It is constantly dealing 
with the possibilities which offer the world in order to discover and carry out its own 
identity, its vocation. Greatly simplifying Ortega’s thesis, we could say that for him 
the “I” is essentially biography, the successful or unsuccessful elaboration of the 
worldly story which makes up each of us. 
 Taking into account the previous features of the world and the “I,” Ortega uses to 
mention the following “attributes of life”:
 Life is always mine, it is personal. It is always present to me. 
 Life is to be in the  life- world, to deal with it, to act in a cultural-historical circum-
stance in which the “I” is thrown. 
 Life is freedom in fatality, fatality because the “I” is thrown into the world and this 
limits its possibilities, and freedom because the “I” must make choices inside 
those limitations in order to discover and carry out its own being. 
 As a consequence of the necessity of making choices all the time, of its freedom, life 
is on the one hand perplexity and drama and on the other hand responsibility.  
 Life is historicity, biography,  ﬁ nitude, time. It is project and projection to the future 
precisely because of the necessity of carrying out our being. 
 These are the most outstanding “attributes of life” in Ortega’s non-idealistic 
phenomenology. A reader of  Sein und Zeit can realize the deep in ﬂ uence that this 
book had in the Spanish thinker. It probably helped him con ﬁ rm or detect some 
“idealistic” problems in Husserl’s  Ideen and to systematize previous original intu-
itions about the correlation I-circumstance. But beyond this fact, the key point con-
cerning Ortega’s thinking, even after 1929, is, as I mentioned at the beginning, that 
he always thought that he was being truthful to the decisive and most original thesis 
of Husserl’s phenomenology: the strict correlation between the “I” and the world. 
Thus, and despite the in ﬂ uence of  Sein und Zeit, he never would have discovered 
this correlation and theorized as he did without his reading of the  Logische 
Untersuchungen and  Ideen I . Ortega will always retain the necessity of reason in 
order to reach an orientation in the life we are, a reason certainly less powerful than 
in Husserl, but with an important role provably absent from Heidegger. 
 Historical Reason, Liberals and Communitarians, 
with an Epilogue on Human Rights and Feminism
Continuing Ortega 
 Taking into account the very general ideas about Ortega’s thinking above, I will try 
to do some phenomenological ventriloquism and, led by the author of  La rebelión 
de las masas, to see how his theory of  historical or vital reason , the new name for 
this non-idealistic phenomenology, performs in a philosophical dispute that has 
11
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
produced many reams of writing in recent years, the dispute between liberals and 
communitarians. Speaking from a Husserlian point of view, this topic is much more 
related to aspects of  Ideen II , which Ortega never knew, and the  Die Krisis der 
europäischen Wissenschaften 20 than to  Ideen I . This part of the essay will essentially 
confront his theory with the challenges of cultural diversity. 
 One of the great debates of moral and political philosophy in the twentieth 
century is between liberals and communitarians. Simplifying a great deal, the liberals, 
old heirs of the Enlightenment, defend the primacy and universality of the individual, 
freedom, and human rights in their canonical formulation. For the majority of the 
liberals, the liberal individual represents something like the kernel of what is human, 
that which we all share or, at the deepest level, are. The communitarians, by contrast, 
maintain that this way of understanding men and women is, at best, just another 
tradition, a common understanding that is as particular as any other. Besides, they 
add, this liberal individual is a rationalistic abstraction, a  papier mâché phantom 
with which no  ﬂ esh-and-blood person can really identify. In this sense, they continue, 
it is not surprising that societies ruled by liberal values have problems nourishing 
community spirit and social responsibility. It is dif ﬁ cult to make sacri ﬁ ces for the 
idea of constitutional patriotism or for abstract human rights, but it is easy to do so 
for one’s homeland or for the ideals of one’s ethnic or religious community. 
 I have referred to the liberalism/communitarianism debate because it raises an 
issue with far-reaching consequences in today’s busy world: Are the human rights 
that appear in the 1948 United Nations  Declaration of Human Rights , above all 
those regarding equality between women and men, actually non-universalizable liberal 
rights? In other words, is the equality declared in Article 16 of the  Declaration , 
which advocates equal rights for men and women, a speci ﬁ c and particular product 
of an equally speci ﬁ c culture, the liberal-enlightened culture, that the West in its 
imperial urge, has attempted to impose on the rest of the planet? Many political and 
intellectual leaders of nearly all the East Asian countries, as well as the representa-
tives of the Arab countries, believe this to be so. Because of this, both have proposed 
alternative Declarations to the 1948 text—the  Declaration of Human Rights in 
Islam , 1990, and the  Declarations of Bangkok and  Singapore , 1993 and 1995—that 
affect not only gender equality, but freedom of conscience, of thought, and of religion, 
 20  This is so much the case that, in an article from 1941 titled “Apuntes sobre el pensamiento, su 
teurgia y su demiurgia,” he identi ﬁ es his historical reason with what is expressed in the  ﬁ rst two 
parts of  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften, published in the journal  Philosophia in 
Belgrad in 1936. But since what Husserl says there does not  ﬁ t Ortega’s interpretation of phenom-
enology from 1929 onward, Ortega states that this text is not really Husserl’s but is rather written 
by his disciple Eugen Fink, because in it phenomenology “leaps to what could never have come 
from it. For me, this leap of phenomenological doctrine has been tremendously satisfactory, 
because it consists of nothing less than resorting to … ‘historical reason.’” José Ortega y Gasset, 
 Obras Completas. Tomo VI (Madrid: Taurus, 2006), 29. English Edition: José Ortega y Gasset, 
“Notes on Thinking: Its Creation of the World and its Creation of God,”  Concord and Liberty , 
(New York: Norton & Company, 1946), 82. 
12
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
as well as freedom of opinion and expression. This is against the aforementioned 
Article 16, and Articles 18 and 19 as well. 21 
 Based on the notions of diversity, cultural relativity, and difference, so beloved 
by a large part of twentieth-century philosophy, these declarations in favor of the 
“Asian or Islamic world view” have been backed up theoretically by the defenders 
of multiculturalism. In a relatively recent book,  Rethinking Multiculturalism , Bhikhu 
Parekh writes: “Although admirable, the UN Declaration is not free of defects. 
It retains a distinctly liberal bias and includes rights which, though admirable, 
cannot claim universal validity; for example, the rights to a more or less unlimited 
freedom of expression, to marriage based on the ‘free will and consent’ of the parties 
involved, and to relatively unlimited property.” Further on he adds: “Universal values 
might also come into con ﬂ ict with the freely-acted central values of a cultural 
community. When members of some indigenous and traditional communities freely 
commit themselves to vows of obedience and service to men in their lives and to 
have nothing to do with equality.… [But we] should not assume that those who 
refuse to share our values are all victims of false consciousness.” 22 
 With these two assertions, among many others, the Indo-British philosopher and 
political scientist seems to assume that human diversity is so great that it is nearly 
impossible to create a hierarchy of cultures according to their moral values and 
political projects, in short, according to their ways of life. In this sense, not only 
would the values assumed to be liberal, enlightened, and Western by the Islamic and 
Asian declarations be far from embodying that which is human in general, but strict 
equality between men and women and freedom of thought and conscience are not 
morally superior to their opposites. And the same can be said, of course, about the 
cultures that hold one set of values and those that hold the other. But is it really 
impossible to create a hierarchy of cultures? Does this supposed radical human 
plurality destroy any attempt at some kind of universality? Does this universality 
mean giving up the evident human diversity and falling into the cultural and political 
imperialism that Western society has practiced so viciously and from which it has 
reaped such abundant bene ﬁ ts? 
 A good way to approach these issues, where the vindication of full human rights 
for women has so much at stake, is by going back to the debate between liberals and 
communitarians. And I will do this following the lead of an author who is not part 
of the canon in this dispute and who is as far from feminism as possible, but whose 
ideas,  malgré lui , are very interesting for this issue. I refer to José Ortega y Gasset 
and his theory of historical reason which, as we shall see, attempts to accept, in the 
best Husserlian phenomenological tradition, the plurality of life, without failing to 
take into account what is shared. From this theory, it is possible to create a hierarchy 
of cultures and to defend the thesis that not all differences are acceptable or equally 
respectable when human rights are discussed. 
 21  For a penetrating analysis of these articles, cf. Pablo de Lora,  Memoria y frontera. El desafío de 
los derechos humanos (Madrid: Alianza Editorial, 2006), 94–111. 
 22  Bhikhu Parekh,  Rethinking Multiculturalism (London: Macmillan Press, 2000), 134, 135. 
13
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
 In the  ﬁ rst part below, I will show how what I call, following Ortega, the  ﬁ rst 
movement or direction of historical reason is essentially pluralistic-relativistic in 
nature and brings him close to the communitarian defenders of differences. In the 
second part, I will refer to a second movement of historical reason, this time of a 
universalistic nature, which clearly brings him closer to the liberals who defend 
a reasonable universality. Finally, in a brief epilogue, I will present some conse-
quences that this historical reason well-tempered by diversity can have in the 
vindication of human rights for women. 
 Reconstructing Plurality: The First Movement 
of Historical Reason 
 In the excellent text,  Las Atlántidas  (1924), Ortega offers a diagnosis of European 
culture, soul, or identity that puts him, to begin with, on the side of communitarian-
ism. On his view, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and accompanying the 
different variations of rationalism—one of whose most outstanding modalities is 
liberalism—the idea that European culture is the embodiment of all that is human 
prevails and other ways of life are only relevant insofar as they have contributed to 
arriving at the peak that is European culture. Those centuries are  Unitarian centuries, 
with no sensitivity to difference and plurality. This is so much so that a science such 
as history, responsible, among other things, for registering these differences, failed 
completely in its task. Ortega says:
 [history] has attempted to take a universal point of view [here universal means that it is 
sensitive to these differences], but, strictly speaking, it has only manufactured European 
history. Gigantic portions of human life, in the past and even in the present, were unknown 
to it and the non-European destinations that it was aware of were dealt with as marginal 
forms of that which is human, as accidents of secondary value, with no other meaning than 
to underline the substantive, central nature of European evolution. More or less, the idea of 
progress was always the axis of historical vision. All of the vicissitudes of the planet were 
organized according to their collaboration in this progress. When a group of people did not 
seem to have contributed to it, they were refused positive historical existence and were 
disquali ﬁ ed as barbarous or savage. However, this progress was simply the development of 
speci ﬁ cally European interests: physical sciences, technology, rationalist law, etc. 23 
 So the historian of this epoch is insensitive to plurality or cannot come to terms 
with it because he is imbued with an idea that Ortega will stigmatize as  false . 
This idea is that humanity is conjugated in singular, that there is something like a 
homogeneous, a priori concept of what humanity is and that Europe possesses this 
concept. Ortega’s radicalness on this point is such that he even holds that the great 
mistake of liberal, Marxist, and Darwinian thinkers, those who have formed the 
beliefs that have molded recent European culture, is that they hold that “the essential 
 23  José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo III (Madrid: Taurus, 2005), 765. Translation 
mine. 
14
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
structure of human life has always been the same,” that “the categories of the human 
mind have not changed”—in short, that Africans, Hindus, and the inhabitants of 
ancient Rome are essentially the same as us, only at a lower stage of technical and 
moral development. 
 To think this way is a profound error and gives up any attempt to truly understand 
the other. Besides, factual reality repeatedly goes against this unitarian desideratum. 
To quote Ortega once more:
 However, when it comes down to the truth, when history was really made, what always 
happened was that the unitarian principle, the assumption of homogeneity, failed and it was 
necessary to resort—covertly or clearly, but late and in a complementary way—to the 
peculiarity of the races, to national spirit, etc., etc. That is, the historian started out, 
capriciously, using a chimera, human unity, homogeneous humanity, and then ran into the 
brutal, irrational, alogical but undeniable fact of the plurality of human forms, of the hetero-
geneity of collective spirits, of the actual incommunication among them. 24 
 It seems then that Ortega, like Husserl and some of the best contemporary 
philosophers, does not want to save us from the awkwardness of the other. By con-
fronting us with the perplexity that a different culture signi ﬁ es, he radically impugns 
our deepest and most evident beliefs, above all, those that have to do with our most 
prized moral and political values. He does not want to tiptoe past the brute fact 
of human diversity, the denial of which has often been at the root of the violence 
done to non-Westerners. Colonialism and its disastrous consequences testify to this. 
This position leads him to support in  Las Atlántidas the interesting concept of 
“universal policentric history,” a new way of practicing this science that would 
reconstruct the meaning produced by non-European cultures. That is, a way of 
understanding their belief systems in themselves, not as a way  to or a step  toward a 
higher kind of culture, Western culture. 
 We must acknowledge that this universal policentric history, this reconstruction 
of meaning, which he also describes as the  ﬁ rst direction of historical reason, does 
in fact dignify other cultures, does treat them as equals; it is truly  policentric . There 
are no hierarchies here, there are no productions of meaning judged to be better 
than others; they are simply different. The diverse traditions rule, constitute the 
identities of the individuals and of the peoples, and judgments can be made only 
from within them. 
 This movement of historical reason, as Ortega grants, is clearly relativistic. This 
is where Ortega converges with a substantial part of contemporary communitarianism 
and all the unconditional supporters of difference. In effect, according to the author 
of  La rebelión de las masas, the liberal-enlightened person not only denigrates 
non-European cultures and treats them unfairly when they are as much manifestations 
of humanness as the culture that liberalism embodies. But, in addition, the nucleus 
of the liberal ideology itself, this supposed generic individual placed beyond any 
tradition, beyond the particularities of history, thus sharing a common nature, is an 
inexistent phantom. 
 24  José Ortega y Gasset,  Obras Completas. Tomo III , 762–63. Translation mine. 
15
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
 It is into this context that the famous anecdote that Ortega tells about the jubilee 
festival organized in honor of Victor Hugo  ﬁ ts perfectly. It seems that the poet 
was in the reception hall receiving the representatives of the different nations that 
wished to honor him. An usher announced their presence: “The representative from 
England,” to which Victor Hugo responded: “England, Shakespeare.” “The represen-
tative from Spain.” And the answer: “Spain, Cervantes.” “The representative from 
Germany.” “Germany, Goethe.” And then the turn of Mesopotamia’s representative 
came. The poet did not know how to respond, because he knew nothing about 
Mesopotamian culture, so the only thing it occurred to him to say was: “Mesopotamia, 
ah humanity!” But the way Ortega  ﬁ nishes this anecdote is well known and 
tremendously signi ﬁ cant here: “I have told this in order to declare, without Victor 
Hugo’s solemnity, that I have never written or spoken for Mesopotamia.” 25 In other 
words, he has never referred to humanity in the abstract. 
 Nevertheless, Ortega’s great audacity and value in the context of the debate 
between liberals and communitarians is that, in spite of initial agreement with the 
communitarians, he does not stop at the  ﬁ rst reconstructive movement of historical 
reason. Following the best in Husserl, Ortega’s second direction of historical reason, 
even while it accepts the contingent and historical nature of human beings in the 
way they are framed in different cultures and traditions, tries to overcome pure 
relativity, pure difference, the mere plurality that simply makes all cultures equal. 
 The Function of European Culture: The Second 
Movement of Historical Reason 
 In  Las Atlántidas , Ortega formulates the second movement of historical reason:
 But it is not enough, in order to approach its fullness, for historical meaning to perceive 
these profound differences that the human soul has shown throughout time. When we have 
keenly understood each epoch and each people in its differential personality, we will not 
have exhausted the possible perfection of historical sensitivity. It is necessary to draw 
conclusions of an estimative order from this very comprehension. … Evaluating the different 
cultures, creating a ranked hierarchy of cultures, involves the previous comprehension of 
each of them. 26 
 That is, once the meanings of the different cultures are reconstructed on the basis 
of each of them and not from the West, it is necessary to contemplate the panorama 
and create a hierarchy, it is necessary to evaluate human plurality. With this, Ortega 
clearly shows that not all cultures are at the same level and, therefore, not all belief 
systems, even if they point to highly relevant speci ﬁ c portions of humanity, can be 
considered equal. Stopping at this step of relativity, making relativism something 
 25  José Ortega y Gasset (2009), 129; English Edition: Ortega (1975), 23. 
 26  José Ortega y Gasset (2005), 771. Translation mine. 
16
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
more than a fact in order to turn it into a metaphysical option, into an absolute, is 
precisely the error committed by many philosophers and anthropologists. 
 So then we must evaluate, we must judge the different cultures. But how can 
we do this, from what standpoint can we do it? How can we evaluate from one 
perspective—in the end, a particular manifestation of that which is human—the 
other points of view? Does this not postulate something that Ortega always 
denied, that is, the eye of God, the absolute perspective that was, for him, impossible? 
At this point, he shows himself, as in many other central aspects of his philosophy, 
to be a good phenomenologist, and goes on to look attentively at reality, or rather 
the different realities that different cultures manifest. And if we follow him, what do 
we discover? First, we discover that each culture has some outstanding stroke of 
genius concerning some vital issues. Asian cultures, for example, have developed 
a deep sense of compassion and techniques to control and order desires that are 
unparalleled in the West. Their aspiration to eliminate the individual, a project 
completely opposite to the European one, has, however, very positive aspects which 
we should learn from in our society in which the individualistic paroxysm often 
becomes pure, irrational whim. Highlighting the genius of different cultures, Ortega 
predicts a “new classicism,” a true one, built from the contributions of different 
traditions. Each people, he holds, will become a classic by touching in a true way 
successive portions of what is real. 
 Taking this into account, now, there is one inevitable question. What is Europe’s 
most outstanding characteristic in this polycentric situation? What is the West’s 
great contribution to this list of classics? It is, precisely, the acknowledgement of 
plurality and what it means. Ortega says:
 History [and here we must remember that history is historical reason], by recognizing the 
relativity of human forms, initiates a form free of relativity. The fact that this form appears 
within a speci ﬁ c culture and is a world view that has appeared in Western man does not 
prevent it from being absolute. The discovery of a truth is always an event with a precise date 
and location. But the truth discovered is ubiquitous and timeless. History is historical reason, 
thus, an effort and an instrument for overcoming the variability of historical material. 27  
 But why is the discovery of human plurality the beginning of a view exempt from 
relativity? Because it is only from this point of view, only by the other confronting 
me, that I can realize the limits of my own tradition, that I can begin to think that 
perhaps my community is inadequate and that I may be mistaken. In short, it is the 
only way that I can experience the philosophical annoyance that the multiple tradi-
tions have given different, non-compatible responses to a single question. In order 
to reach this point, it is necessary to accept plurality. This is, on the other hand, what 
can never be experienced from a strictly relativist and multiculturalist position. 
 The representative of this tradition does not seem perplexed or concerned when 
faced with diversity; he has no problem with it, and Ortega seems to say that this is 
because this kind of view is nothing more than a dogmatic unitarianism multiplied 
by the number of cultures that can be found. From this position, each culture 
 27  Ibid., 772. Translation mine. 
17
1 José Ortega y Gasset and Human Rights
considers itself to be  the culture that will always see all the others exclusively in 
comparison to itself. The West has often made this mistake, but, as far as we know, 
our perspective seems to be the only one that has tried to transcend this limitation in 
a systematic and articulated fashion and to admit the uncomfortable perspective of 
the other. And this is precisely what would make this viewpoint “superior” to the 
rest. As Ortega says, “There is a Chinese culture and a Malaysian culture and a 
Hottentot culture, just as there is a European culture. The only de ﬁ nitive superiority 
of European culture is that it acknowledges this essential parity before discussing 
which is superior. The Hottentot, on the contrary, believes that there is no other 
culture than Hottentot culture.” 28 
 De ﬁ nitively, the thesis that Ortega supports is that we do not have to go beyond 
the level of re ﬂ ectively observed experience in order to begin this second movement 
of historical reason, the movement that deals with creating a hierarchy of cultures. 
Without resorting, in principle, to metaphysical assumptions, we would in fact be 
able to perceive that the genius of the best West is, in the end, an  attitude , a  perspective 
that is rather more inclusive than previous ones because it includes in a very peculiar 
way the other points of view, as well as its own, and it makes them converse with 
one another, it makes them rub up against one another. In short, it considers them 
from a critical point of view. 
 The beginning of philosophy, the famous step from myth to  logos is exactly this: 
an opening up to plurality, letting plurality confront us. It is not accepting inherited 
customs just because they come from our venerable ancestors, but rather criticizing 
them because we have multiple answers for a single question and they cannot all be 
compatible. This is why Ortega states that philosophy is the “tradition of no tradition.” 
From this point of view, the West identi ﬁ es with philosophy and comes under the 
old maxim  logon didónai , to give and receive reasons. This was the brilliant invention 
of the Greeks that allows a peculiar moral “superiority” of the West in comparison 
with other cultures. It must be clearly understood that this “superiority” is due to this 
being the only way of life that has  systematically created an  attitude and a  discourse 
that serves to accept the reasons of the other on an equal footing,  generating , from 
that point, critical and tolerant thinking that aspires to be universal. 29 
 Epilogue: Historical Reason and Full Human Rights for Women 
 So we have seen that Ortega creates a hierarchy of cultures and gives preeminence 
to the West, to a certain manifestation of Western culture, as opposed to all other 
ways of life, because Western culture has taken the other’s point of view seriously, 
 28  Ibid., 757. Translation mine. 
 29  I think that the similarity of this thesis with Husserl’s idea of Europe in  Die Krisis is more than 
noticeable. This is why it is not surprising that, in 1941, Ortega, fully identi ﬁ ed with the melody of 
the  ﬁ rst two parts of this work, assimilating historical and phenomenological reason, as I explained 
above in note 20. 
18
J.M. Díaz Álvarez
treating it critically, and has, thus, been able to open up a dialogue about the uncer-
tain search for what is shared. But if this is so, if we can really reasonably defend 
this thesis, what we are, in the end, stating is that what makes the West “superior,” 
and I must insist on this, is not in principle any substantive ideal about the good life 
that another culture could see as foreign and invasive. In effect, this giving reasons 
for one’s own position in an exchange in which the other is appealed to by me and I 
am appealed to by the other seems like something that anyone with the faculty of 
reason could and should accept. 
 Parehk himself necessarily adopts this perspective not only when he writes his 
book and tries to convince us of the excesses and particularities of the liberal indi-
vidual and that individual’s rights and when he defends the idea that we should take 
the fact that there are people, in this case women, who reasonably and freely accept 
their submission to their husbands instead of taking freedom seriously, no matter 
how strange it may seem. However, if the Western kernel is this rational, mutual 
appeal which, in addition, can be taken up and performed by anyone, this means that 
what we have called the West is categorized in this way because this discourse has 
been widely systematized in this area of the globe. But, in the end, it is not exclusive 
to it but rather responds to a feature of our shared humanity. In short, the best West, 
the one that encourages giving and receiving reasons, would embody not a particular 
culture but generic reasonableness, i.e., a universal value. And what does this 
universal value have to do with the 1948  Declaration of Human Rights ? 
 I cannot fully develop this thesis here, which I have dealt with elsewhere, but I 
do not think it is dif ﬁ cult to see that the mutual appeal of the  lógon didonai is, in the 
end, the basis for liberty, equality, and the banishment of violence as a way of dealing 
with our value con ﬂ icts, i.e., the basis for just some of the essential values that in 
some way support the  United Nations Declaration normatively. 30 To summarize, 
and according to the Ortega-Husserl inspired thesis that I maintain, human rights 
in general, as they have been proposed by the UN and, above all, those that the 
defenders of Islamic or Asian values reject as liberal-particular rights are, contrary 
to their opinion, exactly the nucleus or part of the nucleus of what is shared. 
 To deny this is to accept that only human beings from Western cultures are 
capable of mutual rational appeal, something that is hard to believe and that we 
know for a fact is not true. Anyone who has anything to say should have the freedom 
and the opportunity to do so, independently of sex, race or religion. As a result, there 
should be no legislation against the freedom and equality of all human beings, 
including women, of course, due to certain cultural particularities. If we did this, 
we would be cutting mutual appeal off at the root and de ﬁ nitively abandoning the 
chance to reach consensuses which, however precarious they may be, move us away 
from violence. 
 30  Cf. Jesús M. Díaz Álvarez, “The Foundation of Morality and Normative-Cultural Differences. 
A Phenomenological Approach,”  Interculturalism: Between Identity and Diversity , eds. B. Penas 
Ibañez & Mª. C. López Sáenz (Bern: Peter Lang, 2006), 107–30. 
19
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_2, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Another time, [Husserl] said to us, “Have you seen the work by Dürer called 
‘Knight, Death and the Devil’? He who strives for knowledge must carry a long 
lance, wear a helmet deep over his brow”—here, I believe Husserl placed both 
hands over his temple, where a helmet would be worn—“and ride straight between 
death and the devil like that brave knight.” … Husserl said with quiet conviction that 
he had no wish to be the founder of a school. The greatest thing he had to give us 
was not a  ﬁ nished theory, he said, but “a free thinking.” 
 —TAKAHASHI Satomi,  “Husseru no koto”
 「フッセルのこと」 (“About Husserl”) 
 A Century of Japanese Readings 
 Introduction 
 In the Edo era, Japan isolated itself from the world for more than 200 years (1639–1854), 
but trade continued with China and the Korean peninsula and with the Dutch. In fact, 
the eighteenth century saw a  ﬂ owering of “Dutch studies” ( Rangaku ), indicating that 
political isolation did not lead to complete intellectual isolation. Japan remained open 
to outside in ﬂ uences. 
 Nevertheless, the “opening” of Japan, followed by a radical regime change in 
1868, triggered a great and sudden in ﬂ ux of Western ideas. Philosophy was no 
exception. Japan had no word for “philosophy” in the Western sense until NISHI 
Amane (1829–1897), an educator and of ﬁ cial who had studied in the Netherlands, 
 T.  Toru (*)  
 Department of Philosophy ,  Ritsumeikan University ,  Kyoto ,  Japan 
e-mail:  tanityk3@mtg.biglobe.ne.jp 
 Chapter 2 
 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan 
 Tani  Toru   
20
T. Toru
coined the word  tetsugaku (哲学). 哲学 was eventually adopted as the customary 
term for “philosophy” in China, Korea and Taiwan, although the characters are 
read aloud differently from country to country. Other important terms like “reason” 
(理性) and “science” (科学) are also attributed to NISHI. 
 The Japanese study of Western thinking progressed at a remarkable pace. Early 
scholars pondered philosophies ranging from ancient Greece to contemporary logic, 
but in the late nineteenth century, the focus was on Kant and Hegel (especially the 
 Phänomenologie des Geistes and the concept of “dialectic”), the Neo-Kantians, 
 Lebensphilosophie , and Brentano and Meinong. Contemporary philosophy meant 
German philosophy until World War II, and Husserl’s phenomenology was studied 
as an attractive new theory from philosophy’s heartland. Despite Japan’s position in 
the “Far” East, and despite coming late to the scene, its early scholars of Western 
philosophy were surprisingly up to date. 
 In 1922, a Tokyo-based journal asked Husserl to write the famous  Kaizo articles, 
which appeared initially in Japanese translation and only much later in the original 
German. This happened because Japanese scholars had been reading Husserl for a 
long time and were already deeply interested in his ideas. Some, in fact, actually 
studied in Germany under Husserl himself. Among these, TAKAHASHI Satomi 
(1886–1964) and YAMAUCHI Tokuryu (1890–1982) were instrumental in intro-
ducing phenomenology to the Japanese public through books like TAKAHASHI’s 
 Husseru no genshogaku 『フッセルの現象学』( Husserl’s Phenomenology , 
1931) 1  and YAMAUCHI’s  Genshogaku josetsu 『現象学叙説』( Introduction to 
Phenomenology , 1929). 2  
 Ideen I was read in Japan immediately after its publication in 1913, although the 
Japanese translation came much later. IKEGAMI Kenzo (1900–1956) completed 
one by 1929, but practical dif ﬁ culties delayed its appearance until 1939 (vol. 1) and 
1941 (vol. 2). 
 Meanwhile, as Japan modernized its industry in a frantic effort to match the 
West, new social problems paved the way for Marxist in ﬂ uences. Concurrently, the 
sudden move toward Western-style rationalism triggered an interest in Existentialism, 
which focused on aspects of human existence that elude rational thought. Needless 
to say, Heidegger’s  Sein und Zeit (1927) 3 contributed to this interest. 
 Yet even as Japan increasingly Westernized itself, cultural differences with the 
West were felt as strongly as ever. NISHIDA Kitaro (1870–1945) incorporated 
many Husserlian ideas into his thinking, but advanced a distinctive philosophy that 
was markedly Japanese (or Asian) in character. WATSUJI Tetsuro (1889–1960), 
initially in ﬂ uenced by Heidegger, elaborated an ethical system based on traditional 
Japanese values. 
 1  Tokyo: Daiichi Shobo, 1931. Reprinted in TAKAHASHI Satomi,  Zentaisei no Genshogaku 
(Kyoto: Toeisha, 2001). 
 2  Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1929. ITO Kichinosuke, MIYAMOTO Wakichi, MUTAI Risaku and 
OTAKA Tomoo also visited Husserl during this period. 
 3  Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag. 
21
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
 Defeat in the Paci ﬁ c War was the next great turning point for Japan. Policies 
during the occupation (1945–1952) fostered Americanization on the political and 
institutional fronts, and the Japanese intelligentsia engaged in soul-searching regarding 
the totalitarian and nationalistic tendencies that had supported the war. Meanwhile 
the world immersed itself in a cold war and a hot one broke out on the Korean 
peninsula, ironically resuscitating Japanese industry. The Vietnam War then led to a 
heated political debate about Japan’s alliance with the U.S. and to a wider debate 
about where Japan was headed, politically and ideologically. Marxism and 
Existentialism played important roles in this debate and Jean-Paul Sartre was espe-
cially in ﬂ uential in turning Japanese eyes toward the “individual.” 
 The popularity of existentialism and Sartre’s debt to phenomenology awakened 
new interest in Husserl in the 1960s, while Sartre’s emphasis on the isolation of the 
subject led to a reconsideration of the relationship with the Other—a discussion 
often linked to Marxist arguments concerning alienation. The problems of human 
existence and society as a whole triggered a general awareness of a “crisis” of 
humanity. 4 Problems brought forward by Sartre also led to interest in Merleau-
Ponty, whose analysis of intercorporeality was regarded as an escape from the 
conundrum of isolated existence. 
 Against this background, phenomenology was seen as a critical philosophy, 
 ﬁ ne-tuned to deal with the crises of the modern world, and  Ideen was often read as 
an introduction to  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzen-
dentale Phänomenologie. 5 Others, in ﬂ uenced by American scienti ﬁ c philosophy, 
read phenomenology as a theory of science, but in this case also as a prelude to the 
 Krisis.  A modernized translation of  Ideen I appeared in 1979 and 1984, generating 
a renewed discussion about how Husserl should be read.  
 Translating Husserl 
 In response to these historical and social conditions, and also as the fruit of a long-
term scholarly interest in the work of Husserl, most of his major writings have been 
slowly but surely translated into Japanese. A new two-volume translation of  Ideen 
I by WATANABE Jiro (1931–2008) was published in 1979 and 1984. The  ﬁ rst volume 
of a two-volume translation of  Ideen II by TATEMATSU Hirotaka (1931–) and 
BESSHO Yoshimi (1956–), appeared in 2001, and the second, by TATEMATSU 
and SAKAKIBARA Tetsuya (1958–), in 2009.  Ideen III , translated by WATANABE 
Jiro and CHIDA Yoshiteru (1943–), followed in 2010. 
 4  Discussions about “crisis” were also widespread among readers of Heidegger, who had continued 
to be relatively popular through the war years. After interest in Sartre declined, interest in Heidegger 
became stronger—particularly because of the renewed controversy regarding his complicity with 
Nazism. This led to interest in Levinas and Derrida, as was no doubt the case elsewhere. 
 5  Belgrade, 1936. 
22
T. Toru
 In the 30 years it took for the Japanese  Ideen to appear, a translation of  Analysen 
zur passiven Synthesis (1977) by YAMAGUCHI Ichiro (1947–) and TAMURA 
Kyoko (1954–), a new translation of the  Cartesianische Meditationen (2001) by 
HAMAUZU Shinji (1952–), and two translations of Husserl’s  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica article, one by TAHARA Hachiro (1947–) in 1980 and another by TANI 
Toru (1954–) in 2004, were published. 
 Translation inevitably involves problems of cultural differences, even between 
languages as similar as German and English. The translating of German into 
Japanese is much more dif ﬁ cult. When Husserl’s writings were  ﬁ rst introduced 
to Japan, “philosophy” was still exotic and phenomenological concepts were a 
complete unknown, making the translation of  Ideen I a monumental task. Cairns’ 
 Guide for Translating Husserl could suggest “constitution” for  Konstitution , but 
Japanese translators had to invent a term from scratch, even as they struggled to 
understand the concept itself. In the  ﬁ rst translation of  Ideen I , IKEGAMI translated 
 Konstitution as  kisei (規整) instead of  kosei (構成) (which was introduced after the 
war and is used today).  Kisei is not a normal Japanese word, but the ideograms 
indicate an “ordering of elements according to rules.” Today this seems a misreading, 
which was not uncommon in early translations. When many concepts are non-existent, 
the creative aspects of translation emerge and occasionally miss the mark. 
 In contrast to IKEGAMI’s somewhat rudimentary reading of Husserl, 
WATANABE’s new  Ideen I  provides many detailed footnotes, including commentary 
on terminology (with references to differences between the Biemel and Schuhmann 
editions), on translations into other languages (especially Ricœur’s French transla-
tion), and references to research by other scholars. WATANABE’s  Ideen I is a 
notable example of scholarly research extending far beyond the usual scope of 
translation. 
 Today, phenomenology is a major school of thought in Japan. The 
Phenomenological Association of Japan has nearly 500 members, making Japan 
one of the world’s most active countries with regard to phenomenological study. 
This is the result of a century of reading Husserl—even before translations were 
available—and owes much to the many prewar scholars who struggled with, against, 
and for Husserl across the barriers of language and culture. Their reading of  Ideen 
I was especially important for the development of Japanese phenomenology and is 
the foundation of phenomenological study today. 
 The Early Phenomenologists 
 NISHIDA Kitaro (1870–1945) is known as the founder of the Kyoto School of 
philosophy. Born 11 years later and outliving him by only 7 years, NISHIDA was a 
true contemporary of Husserl. Although he is primarily known in the West for his 
orientation toward Zen, the way he embedded the concepts of  noesis and  noema 
(as developed in  Ideen I ) in his philosophy—although somewhat idiosyncratically—
shows how strong and deep his ties were to phenomenology. 
23
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
 NISHIDA’s interest in Husserl had awakened by 1911 and lasted much longer, as 
indicated by frequent references to phenomenology in letters to TANABE Hajime. 6 
In early 1914, he refers to what is probably  Ideen I and writes: “I think this Husserl 
is also quite interesting.” 7 That summer, he writes: “I hope to consider thoroughly 
that school of thought from Austria, which discusses the distinction between  Inhalt 
and  Gegenstand , beginning with Bolzano and Brentano and going on to Meinong 
and Husserl and Lipps.” 8 The next summer, he writes: “This man [Husserl] is very 
capable. I recommend that you study him. First consider Bolzano and Brentano, 
then go on to Twardowski. If you read Husserl after these, you will  ﬁ nd him quite 
comprehensible. (What Bolzano says from the viewpoint of logic and Brentano says 
from psychology, Husserl combines and develops philosophically.) I believe Husserl 
to be a further development of the ideas of Bolzano and Brentano.” 9 
 Later, in September, 1915, Nishida mentions  Ideen by name, observing that it is 
too indiscriminate to say that phenomenology is merely a science of essence intuition, 
since it is more a way of looking at essence from the viewpoint of “pure experience.” 
But he also criticizes phenomenology for not being suf ﬁ ciently “ rein unmittelbar.” 10 
By November 30, he is writing that “we should not be satis ﬁ ed with what Husserl 
calls  Phänomenologie. I believe that we must delve more deeply.” These comments 
reveal how Husserl was approached and digested by Nishida and other philosophers 
of his generation. 
 In a 1916 lecture entitled “Idealist Philosophy in Modern Times,” NISHIDA 
says: “Our experience can be divided into content and act, but these two are of 
course two aspects of one experience and must be correlated to one another. 
Phenomenology is an attempt to shed light on this relationship from the viewpoint 
of pure consciousness.” 11 Regarding the structure of pure consciousness (or pure 
experience), NISHIDA took the investigation in a direction of his own, particularly 
in his analysis of “self-awareness.” 
 Near the end of his life, NISHIDA wrote another younger colleague: “Japanese 
scholars have no ability of insight. Kant and Husserl are all right, but Heidegger and 
Jaspers are only  epigonen . It is now a turning point not only for world history, but 
also for philosophy. Persevere in your research.” 12 Nishida’s view notwithstanding, 
although subsequent scholars did not lose interest in Husserl, most seemed to  ﬁ nd 
the attraction to Heidegger much stronger. 
 TANABE Hajime (1885–1962), 18 years younger and a disciple of NISHIDA, soon 
advanced a distinctive theory of his own, called the “logic of species.” He probably 
 6  NISHIDA Kitaro,  Collected Works, vol. 19 (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 2006). 
 7  Ibid . , 226 (letter dated January 1, 1914). 
 8  Ibid . , 240 (letter dated August 5, 1914). 
 9  Ibid . , 259–60 (letter dated July 12, 1915). 
 10  Ibid . , 261. 
 11  NISHIDA Kitaro,  Collected Works , vol. 12 (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 2004), 64. 
 12  NISHIDA Kitaro,  Collected Works, vol. 23, p. 176, in a letter to SAWAGATA Hisataka, dated 
January 13, 1944. 
24
T. Toru
discussed phenomenology with NISHIDA more than anyone else. TANABE was one 
of a handful of Japanese who actually studied under Husserl—in TANABE’s case, 
in 1922. Following his return home, he published a paper called  Genshogaku ni 
okeru atarashiki tenko 『現象学に於ける新しき転向 13 (“New Developments in 
Phenomenology,” 1924), which begins by categorizing contemporary German philosophy 
into two tendencies: the “philosophy of science (or knowledge)” and the “philosophy 
of life” ( Lebensphilosophie ). The Kantian “philosophy of science (knowledge)” is “too 
alienated from life to win hearts and minds, the two-world theory of its thorough-going 
Platonism being too severe and uncongenial for people who are suffering from the 
harshness of reality,” he comments, before turning his attention to  Lebensphilosophie . 
 Finally, he describes phenomenology, which begins as a philosophy of science 
(knowledge) but goes on to investigate a consciousness “that we experience directly, 
undistorted by prejudice or theory.” TANABE explains that phenomenology does 
this by taking the “evidence of intuition” as its starting point. 14 He no doubt has 
 Ideen in mind in making this characterization and also refers directly to  Ideen in the 
paper. In any case, TANABE regarded phenomenology as a way to integrate what 
he saw as the two major philosophical tendencies of the era. He focuses on the 
Neo-Kantians (particularly Rickert) as representative of the scienti ﬁ c philosophy of 
the time, citing their over-emphasis of “form,” and says that phenomenology in 
contrast makes it possible to grasp an object with its speci ﬁ c content intact. It also 
“sheds a ray of light on the content-form problem” by means of the concept of 
categorical intuition, he says. However, he adds that it is insuf ﬁ cient to deal with the 
matter merely at the level of “logic.” This is a  konstruktive Phänomenologie (a term 
TANABE uses negatively), he says, and asserts that a more concrete investigation is 
called for. 
 TANABE is also critical that phenomenology regards consciousness as a  ﬁ xed 
entity. “Consciousness develops its essence through phenomenological knowing,” 
he writes. “It is the self-expression of consciousness itself. Phenomenology is itself 
the self-awareness of consciousness, is none other than the ground phenomenon 
( Grundphänomen ) of consciousness.” 15 He regards phenomenology as the move-
ment of a self-developing consciousness, as might be seen from the perspective of a 
 Lebensphilosophie . TANABE approves of Heidegger for heading in this direction 
and indicates that he himself wanted to take the same direction. 
 Ninshikiron 
to 
genshogaku 『認識論と現象学』(“Epistemology 
and 
Phenomenology,” 1925) 16 is more speci ﬁ c: “From the second decade of this century, 
that is, after the end of the Great War, Europeans have been suffering from extreme 
anxiety and incline toward skepticism and despair. For them, a ‘philosophy of 
 13  Published in vol. 36 of the journal  Shiso  (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1924); reprinted in TANABE 
Hajime,  Collected Works , vol. 4 (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1963). 
 14  Ibid . , 19 ff. 
 15  Ibid . , 24. 
 16  Reprinted in TANABE Hajime,  Collected Works , vol. 4 (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1963). 
25
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
science’ seems almost irrelevant. Their interest lies in the comprehension of living 
facts, rather than in the ordering of logic or the perfection of systems.” 17 In this 
essay, TANABE presents the development of traditional European philosophy, 
indicates the groundbreaking aspects of phenomenology in the  Logische 
Untersuchungen and  Ideen, then shows how these are developed by Heidegger. He 
approves of what one might call a shift “from constructive phenomenology to 
hermeneutical phenomenology,” where “constructive” is used in the negative sense 
of dealing only with abstract and logical objects. However, we should mention that 
TANABE later criticized Heidegger with great severity in a paper called  Kiki no 
tetsugaku ka tetsugaku no kiki ka 「危機の哲学か哲学の危機か」 (“A Philosophy 
of Crisis or a Crisis of Philosophy?” 1933). 18 
 KUKI Shuzo (1888–1941)—sometimes called “Baron Kuki”—spent 8 years in 
Europe in the 1920s and studied under Rickert, Bergson, and Heidegger. After his 
return home, he  ﬁ rst turned his attention (and European methods) to a traditional 
Japanese concept called  iki 「いき」 (a type of aesthetic consciousness distinctive 
of the old Tokyo culture) and published a book in 1930 called  Iki no kozo 『いきの
構造』 ( The structure of iki) . 19 This was followed 5 years later by  Guzensei no 
mondai 『偶然性の問題』( The problem of contingency ). 20 Both books make use of 
phenomenological and hermeneutical methods, although KUKI is better known in 
Japan for his originality than for his knowledge of European philosophy. 
 KUKI was more a follower of Heidegger than of Husserl, but he does mention 
Husserl in “Gendai tetsugaku no doko”「現代哲学の動向」 (“Trends in Modern 
Philosophy” 1937), 21 where he introduces readers to names like Husserl, Brentano, 
and Meinong.  Ideen is not mentioned in this lecture, but he undoubtedly had accurate 
knowledge of the text. KUKI is critical of Husserl’s approach to intersubjectivity: 
“Husserl calls his phenomenology a transcendental phenomenology and maintains 
that a systematic and exhaustive pursuit of the egological analysis will lead to an 
intersubjective phenomenology. However, inasmuch as intersubjectivity is made to 
depend on the pure I, we must regard Husserl’s phenomenology as being forever 
centered in the egological reduction.” But he adds: “Although Husserl’s phenom-
enology is dry and tasteless and contains nothing to excite the reader, the attitude of 
attempting to build an exact science upon the principle that nothing may be admitted 
but that which is evident to the intuition is itself worthy of deep admiration. 
Phenomenology has been greatly in ﬂ uential in terms of this attitude and its method-
ology. This basic principle is phenomenology’s greatest merit.” 22 
 17  Ibid . , 39. 
 18  TANABE Hajime,  Collected Works , vol. 8 (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1964). 
 19  Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1930. Reprinted in KUKI Shuzo,  Collected Works , vol. 1 (Tokyo: 
Iwanami Shoten, 2011). 
 20  Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1935. Reprinted in KUKI Shuzo,  Collected Works , vol. 2 (Tokyo: 
Iwanami Shoten, 2011). 
 21  Reprinted in earlier edition of  Collected Works , vol. 9 (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1981). 
 22  Ibid . , 397. 
26
T. Toru
 KUKI then describes further developments in phenomenology in a way indicative 
of his own understanding of Husserl: “Scheler developed Husserl’s phenomenology 
in the direction of a  Lebensphilosophie , and from there, Heidegger transformed 
it into a philosophy of existence. There are three stages in the development of 
phenomenology: (1) Husserl and pure consciousness, (2) Scheler and life, and (3) 
Heidegger and existence.” 23 
 Also to be noted is that the customary present-day translation of Husserl’s  tran-
szendental as  choetsuronteki (超越論的) was proposed by KUKI. In the context of 
Kantian philosophy,  transzendental is translated as  senkenteki (先験的) (literally, 
“preceding experience”). KUKI suggested that  choetsuronteki is more suitable for 
phenomenology because it maintains the link with  transzendent ( choetsuteki (超越
的) in Japanese).  Choetsu , incidentally, corresponds to the Latin root  trans and 
means “going beyond.” 
 Genshogaku josetsu 『現象学叙説』 ( Introduction to Phenomenology ,1929), 24 
by YAMAUCHI Tokuryu (1890–1982), was widely read in the prewar years. This 
was less an academic study than a relaxed commentary on phenomenology in 
YAMAUCHI’s own words. His basic strategy is to outline the characteristics of 
Husserlian phenomenology through a comparison with Kant, although the relationship 
to other philosophies is also considered. YAMAUCHI regarded phenomenology as 
being on a completely equal footing with Kantian philosophy: “Personally, I believe 
there is no mistake in asserting that these two schools of thought are representative 
of the scienti ﬁ c viewpoint that is and can be found in the attitude of all those who 
have philosophized throughout the history of thought,” he writes in his Preface. 25 
 YAMAUCHI’s  Introduction also shows his preference for the  Logische 
Untersuchungen : “It seems to me that his [Husserl’s] thinking has greatly progressed 
between the  Logische Untersuchungen and the  Ideen , but there is by no means 
any fundamental change in stance. The phenomenological viewpoint is already 
suf ﬁ ciently formulated in the  Logische Untersuchungen , and with regard to content, 
it would be appropriate to say that the earlier work is more productive in the devel-
opment of its philosophy.” 26 
 YAMAUCHI may have felt that Husserl had regressed toward Kant in  Ideen , an 
impression shared by many modern readers. “I myself am now more interested in 
Heidegger,” he writes, because Heidegger “makes an effort to reexamine all matters 
after reducing them to the speci ﬁ c being of life.” 27 In this respect, YAMAUCHI was 
among the many scholars of his day who were attracted to  Lebensphilosophie . He 
placed great importance on epistemology, however, and found Heidegger’s some-
what questionable: “There remain many questions as to whether it is possible to 
 23  Ibid., 400. 
 24  Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1929. 
 25  Ibid . , vi. 
 26  Ibid . , 2–3. 
 27  Ibid . , vi. 
27
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
discuss these matters without dealing with the problem of consciousness from the 
epistemological viewpoint.” 28 
 As with YAMAUCHI, many of his readers were often torn between an attraction 
to  Lebensphilosophie on the one hand and loyalty to the Kantian (and neo-Kantian) 
tradition on the other, and thus tended to read  Ideen as something that mediated 
between them. 
 TAKAHASHI Satomi (1886–1964) was a great admirer of Husserl and paid 
personal homage to his idol in 1926. He studied in Freiburg for a year, then returned 
to Japan to publish  Husseru no genshogaku 『フッセルの現象学』( Husserl’s 
Phenomenology , 1931). 29 His perception of Husserl and Heidegger differs some-
what from the scholars mentioned above. He writes: “The present situation in the 
world of philosophy seems to indicate that people’s hearts and minds have moved 
on from Husserl’s constitutive phenomenology to the hermeneutic phenomenology 
of Heidegger, but it would be a great mistake to assume from this that the former has 
been made obsolete by the latter.” 30 TAKAHASHI’s book is a presentation of 
Husserl’s basic concepts, using  Ideen as its main reference and adding material from 
lectures he attended in Freiburg. Of special note are his commentaries on “passivity,” 
“intersubjectivity,” and “corporeality.” 31 Neither the  Cartesianische Meditationen, 
Ding und Raum, nor  Ideen II had been published yet, but he accurately predicted 
Husserl’s direction from the lectures. 
 TAKAHASHI also gave the Japanese public its  ﬁ rst image of Husserl the man 
(with an emphasis on Husserl’s devotion to philosophy), and this is the man people 
still think of when they speak of Husserl. 32 His book is a precise, academic, and 
unbiased reading of Husserl, but he himself later advanced a distinctive “phenom-
enology of totality” for which he is best known in Japan. 
 Marxist-leaning scholars of the early twentieth century read Husserl in a different 
way. HONDA Kenzo (1898–1938) became interested in phenomenology in the 
early 1920s, and after reading  Ideen , wrote about  Formalisierung and  Generalisierung 
with a focus on  Neutralitätsmodi ﬁ kation. In a later paper,  Genshogaku to yuibutsu-
benshoho 『現象学と唯物弁証法』(“Phenomenology and materialistic dialectic,” 
1929), 33 his interpretation develops in another direction: “In the beginning, phenom-
enology strove to establish a universal mathematics, and as such, interested itself in 
a formal ontology that would encompass the various forms of pure grammar and the 
various rules of logic, but as the focus shifted from expressions to that which is 
 28  Ibid . 
 29  Tokyo: Daiichi Shobo, 1931. Reprinted in TAKAHASHI Satomi,  Zentaisei no Genshogaku 
(Kyoto: Toeisha, 2001). 
 30  Ibid . , 9. 
 31  Ibid., 47 ff. 
 32  This refers to the portrayal in  Husseru no koto (“About Husserl”), cited at the head of this paper 
(cf. Note 1). 
 33  Tokyo: Kobushi Shobo, 1997. 
28
T. Toru
expressed, sense and its ful ﬁ llment came to be the problem, and consciousness was 
brought to the fore as the source of the bestowing of sense.” 34 
 HONDA  ﬁ nds temporality to be the source of consciousness and writes: “In 
searching for the premise of all premises, for the basis of all viewpoints, phenom-
enology arrived at that which  ﬂ ows instead of that which is  ﬁ xed.” He calls this the 
“dialectical turn” of phenomenology. “Can phenomenology and dialectic coexist?” 
he asks. “Is a dialectical phenomenology or a phenomenological dialectic possible? 
Is there at least a margin in which such a combination can exist?” 35 HONDA 
expands his inquiry to include the hermeneutical tendency of Heidegger and then 
further to Kierkegaard’s existential dialectic and sees an inner connection between 
phenomenology and dialectic—an interpretation linked to an existentialist reading 
of Heidegger. 
 Ultimately, however, HONDA recognizes the discontinuity between phenom-
enology and dialectic. The former leads neither to “production” nor “practice,” he 
says. He turns for help to Marcuse, who also attempted to reconcile Marxism and 
phenomenology, but eventually concludes: “The phenomenological dialectic is 
not a materialistic dialectic and dialectical phenomenology is not a dialectical 
materialism.” 36  
 Phenomenology in Postwar Japan 
 In brie ﬂ y following the work of these prewar scholars, we see that Husserl’s  Ideen 
I was known and read in Japan almost contemporaneously with its publication in 
Germany. People were attracted to phenomenology for various historical and cultural 
reasons, and also as an object of purely scholarly interest. In postwar Japan, interest in 
phenomenology was linked to a consciousness of “crisis”—social and intellectual—
with a focus on Husserl’s later writing. At the same time, the scholarly tradition 
of phenomenological research also remained strong. As work on the  Husserliana 
volumes progressed in Europe and previously unpublished material and manuscripts 
came to light concerning subjects like genetic phenomenology and the phenomenology 
of intersubjectivity, new possibilities opened up.  Ideen , for example, could now be 
read in a different way. The new Japanese versions, for example, translate various 
terms in ways that re ﬂ ect Husserl’s ideas about genetic phenomenology. This in turn 
has opened doors to still other ways of reading Husserl. 
 Research trends in Japan have taken a new turn in recent years. Or rather, they 
have turned back to old interests. Younger scholars are showing more interest in 
logical theory and object theory, and interest in ethics has also made a comeback. 
These tendencies will no doubt in ﬂ uence future readings of  Ideen . 
 34  Ibid . , 56. 
 35  Ibid . , 60. 
 36  Ibid . , 73. 
29
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
 When TAKAHASHI Satomi visited Germany in 1926, he expressed resentment 
at the prevalent belief that the only philosophy worthy of the name was European 
philosophy. At the same time, he was greatly impressed with the importance of what 
Husserl called “free thinking.” “Many things will be born of this,” he wrote. Indeed, 
many things have been born in Japan, as in the rest of the world.  The Phenomenology 
of Mediality , 37 a collection published in honor of NITTA Yoshihiro (1929–)—an 
important postwar phenomenologist—is a good example of how phenomenology 
has thrived in Japan. KIMURA Bin (1931–) has advanced a remarkable theory of 
psychiatry; UEDA Shizuteru (1926–) has formulated an original theory of the self 
linked to the traditions of the NISHIDA School. NOE Keiichi, WASHIDA Kiyozaku, 
and MURATA Junichi—postwar baby-boomers—have expanded the horizons of 
phenomenology by assimilating the fruits of contemporary philosophy and science. 
“Interculturality”—a central problem for Japanese thinkers since the opening of 
Japan in the mid-nineteenth century (and actually from long before)—is now a 
major phenomenological topic. 
 There is no de ﬁ nitive way to read or translate Husserl. New and different readings 
“appear” in correlation to the questions that motivate the reading. In the century since 
the  ﬁ rst volume was published,  Ideen has continued to renew its “appearance” and 
activate and reactivate thought in new directions and will no doubt continue to do so 
in the future.  
 Responding to the  Ideen Today 
 How should the  Ideen be read today? 
 Let me follow in the steps of Husserl’s “free thinking.” In the  Krisis , Husserl says 
that the Cartesian  epochē in  Ideen I had a “great shortcoming” in that it arrived at 
the transcendental ego in a single leap and thus seemed to leave it empty of content 
(Hua VI, p.158). This can be read as an admission of failure. However, in rereading 
 Ideen , it seems to me that the “logic of failure” ( logos hamartikos ) can lead us to a 
new way of “doing phenomenology.” 
 The phenomenological reduction was initially conceived as a way to circumvent 
the problem of the  gegenstandlose Vorstellung (objectless representation) encoun-
tered in the thinking of Bolzano and Meinong. This entails the problem (discussed 
since Hume) of the “dual existence” of a representation and of the object that it 
represents but which exists outside it. How can the existence of this object be 
con ﬁ rmed? By stepping outside the representation? But how can we access an 
object directly, unmediated by a representation? 
 Husserl decided to approach the problem from the opposite direction. No one 
can step outside the representation—that is, outside consciousness, experience, or 
life—he said, and proposed that we  epochē the existence of transcendent objects 
 37  NITTA Yoshihiro et al.,  The Phenomenology of Mediation (Tokyo: Seidosha, 2002). 
30
T. Toru
(i.e., whatever exists outside consciousness) and “reduce” it to the transcendental 
consciousness, experience and life that precede existence and make it possible. The 
idea of the phenomenological reduction is already indicated in a margin note of the 
 Logische Untersuchungen (Hua XIX/1, 364) and the “transcendent interpretation” 
of existence was proscribed (or epochēd) in  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren 
Zeitbewußtseins. However, it was  Die Idee der Phänomenologie that clearly de ﬁ ned 
the concept, and  Ideen that developed it. 
 But in  Ideen , the “pure ego” rejected in the  Logische Untersuchungen is reaf ﬁ rmed 
as “a transcendence in immanence” (Hua III/1, 124). What is this “transcendence”? 
Is it like the transcendence of an object? In the  Krisis , Husserl corrects himself and 
says the ego is called the ego only by “equivocation” (Hua VI 188). What is this 
equivocation? It has to do with the way we speak of the ego: as a noun, as an indicator, 
or as a personal pronoun. 
 For example, the later Husserl says: “ ‘I’ indicates thereby a distinctive centering 
of my life, of my consciousness” (Hua XIV, 312). The ego is seen here as a (verbal) 
function that keeps life and consciousness from falling apart. This integrating function 
is not equivalent to the life or consciousness thus integrated and, in this sense, may 
be said to transcend them, but it is dangerously close to a mistake to express a verbal 
function with a noun—to mark it, as it were, as “something transcendent.” 
 In  Ideen II , on the other hand, Husserl says the point of departure of phenomeno-
logy is the “I,” “now” and “here” (Hua IV, 349), which can be regarded as indicators. 
They are like the “now” and “here” of sensory certitude in Hegel’s phenomenology, 
where the initial “now” and “here” are unique, but appear general through linguistic 
expression. Essentially, they should refer back to the originally unique. It seems 
to me that Husserl’s “ego” is similar, in being the forced expression of something 
originally unique that essentially cannot be expressed by language, which generalizes. 
Even indicators fail in this respect. 
 Thirdly, this unique entity is nevertheless in a relationship with the Other. In an 
experience of the Other, “I” is called “thou” and “thou” calls itself “I.” This is 
possible by means of a transgression from my unique body to the body of the Other. 
The body is not a barrier to “my” transgressing. Even where a transcendent interpre-
tation is prohibited, the body transcends itself, and furthermore, simultaneously 
receives meaning from other bodies into itself. Through this transgression, there 
appears to the unique ego another entity similar—but not entirely identical—to 
itself. Personal pronouns are an expression of this relationship. However, even after 
the unique becomes one among many, the “I”—when it “re ﬂ ects”—still appears to 
itself as the one and only. A personal pronoun cannot express this aspect of the ego. 
After all, “one among many” and “the one and only” are inherently contradictory. 
It is only in a moving relationship, where when one appears the other is hidden, and 
multiplicity and singularity conceal each other, that both are compossible. 
 Husserl failed to explain the “I” precisely, but it is precisely this failure that 
points to the possibilities. 
 By reducing the matter to the ego, phenomenology takes us to the question: “What 
is a phenomenon?” In  Die Idee der Phänomenologie , Husserl writes: “The word 
 Phänomen is ambiguous because of the essential correlation between  Erscheinen 
31
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
(appearing) and  Erscheinendes  (that which appears).” (Hua II, 14) That is, when 
“something that appears appears,” we encounter both a noun (the “that which 
appears”) and a verb (the “appearing”). This is no mere tautology. In fact, it implies 
many things. 
 For example, a rectangle as a “that which appears” can appear through the 
mediation of various “appearances”—for example, as a parallelogram or as a trap-
ezoid. We could say the “that which appears” is intended through, or mediated by, 
these appearances. By understanding these appearances as “meanings,” and by 
considering the aggregate of these meanings, Husserl arrives at the  noema  in  Ideen 
I . An object is intended through/mediated by its  noema  (the sum of its meanings). 
Intention presupposes the possibility of ful ﬁ llment, so we can now say: the object 
is intended through/mediated by its  noema  (the sum of its meanings), and this 
intention is sometimes ful ﬁ lled. This concept of the  noema  was one of  Ideen I ’s 
strongest points. 
 In contrast, the concept of  noesis had a great shortcoming.  The Idea of 
Phenomenology indicated the ambiguity of the “that which appears” and the 
“appearing”—that is, the nominal and verbal aspects of appearance. Of course, 
since the “that which appears” is dependent on an “appearing,” the verbal aspect 
takes precedence. However, a (verbal) “appearing” cannot appear in the same way 
that a (nominal) “that which appears” can. It appears only through “re ﬂ ection.” 
“The  cogitatio , that is, the ‘appearing’ itself, becomes the object in re ﬂ ection, and it 
is this that easily leads to equivocation.” (Hua II, 14) “Equivocation” is synonymous 
to “ambiguity.” Re ﬂ ection makes the “appearing” to appear, and therefore the concept 
of the phenomenon is equivocal. However, inasmuch as phenomenology is the study 
of phenomena, the re ﬂ ection that makes the “appearing” appear (as a phenomenon) 
is necessarily the pillar of its methodology. The words: “the phenomenological 
method progresses entirely in acts of re ﬂ ection” (Hua III/1, 162) should be under-
stood in this context. And inasmuch as re ﬂ ection is the self-re ﬂ ection of the ego, it 
is also tied to the concept of the I. 
 The ego, however, is utterly self-forgetful. It is not that the ego forgets a self that 
it once knew. Rather, the transcendental ego is self-forgetful from the very start and 
sees itself as one of the objects of the world. In this sense, it is already out there—in 
the world. It is only by coming back to itself through re ﬂ ection that it becomes 
aware of its own self-forgetfulness and appears to itself as the ego. 
 Now, in  Die Idee der Phänomenologie , the verb “to appear” is expressed as a 
noun:  cogitatio . In the  Logische Untersuchungen , “appearing” is referred to as an 
“act,” while in  Ideen , it is called  noesis . These noun forms necessarily fail to 
express something that should be expressed as a verb.  Noesis must be taken back 
to its verbal state. 
 The verb “to appear” implies that it appears  to or  for something or someone. 
When something appears to the previously mentioned ego, this implies an ego of the 
dative case. The various “appearances” move  toward the ego, as they move  toward 
the objects of which they are the appearances. The dative case implies the perspec-
tivity of “appearing.” While the ego of the nominative case—the ego of the “I think” 
( cogito )—implies control over the appearing, the dative ego has no such control. 
32
T. Toru
The appearing has begun before the ego starts to function and is already reaching 
out to the ego. It is only after this that the ego becomes nominative and takes over, 
thus accomplishing the appearance. The ego being both dative and nominative in 
this manner—and although language cannot simultaneously express the dual 
aspect—it (the ego) is innately involved in the “appearing” in that it ultimately 
makes to appear what has begun to appear. In this sense, the  self -re ﬂ ection of the 
ego is the completion of its own “appearing.” 
 The “appearing” is in itself not a simple matter but has a genetic structure. 
Genetic phenomenology elucidates the “how” of appearing, although  Ideen failed to 
do this. A genetic analysis could show how the ego spoken of in  Ideen is born and 
appears. The “appearing” moves toward the ego, which is a  didonai (gift) of that 
appearing. The dimension at which this takes place can be called the “primal ego.” 
The “appearing” begins there, and is completed by the ego that is triggered by the 
appearing. However, the dimension of the primal ego appears only after the ego that 
has been born “re ﬂ ects” and objecti ﬁ es the primal ego (or places it in the accusative 
case, so to speak). Thus, the source (the primal ego) appears—and fails to appear—
only through a return from the end product. 
 The phenomenological reduction prevents us from saying that something  ini-
tially exists in itself and then appears  from there. It is the other way around. The 
“that which appears appears” occurs  ﬁ rst, and when this occurrence does not end at 
once, does not hide itself, and “subsists” from one point in time to another, then we 
believe that it “exists.” In other words, “existence” is possible as a combination of 
“appearance” and “temporalization.” This is the mechanism behind the “positing of 
existence.” But once existence is posited, the perspectivity of appearance is forgotten 
and objectivism and substantialism take its place. Objectivism relegates “appearing” 
to the sphere of psychology, while substantialism regards the ego as an entity. 
But these are examples of putting the cart before the horse. 
 The  Krisis speaks of many “special worlds” and also of multiple “life worlds.” 
But no matter how many worlds appear to us, they all—upon re ﬂ ection—belong to 
the one and only world and appear within the bounds of that World. “The world 
does not exist as an existent or as an object but in its uniqueness, and for this unique-
ness, multiplicity is meaningless,” (Hua VI, 146) writes Husserl. This uniqueness 
corresponds to the one-and-only-ness of the transcendental ego. It multiplies itself, 
but subsumes all of the multiplicities, so that “the exterior is without meaning.” 
(Hua I, 117) Now this statement should be understood dynamically. The expanded 
scope of the World remains unthematized and hidden until it appears with the next 
re ﬂ ection. When it appears, it is as a “universe” ( Universum ) (a “tending towards 
the One”) and should be regarded as an “Idea” that ideally reaches beyond the 
movement of multiplicity or uniqueness. 
 This re ﬂ ective analysis is deeply linked to interculturality, which is a traditional 
problem for Japan and also a modern problem for the world as a whole. When 
we encounter an alien world, we transcend our own culture and learn to see it as a 
separate culture. When we encounter others from an alien culture, we see how things 
appear differently and are experienced differently by beings we recognize as fellow 
humans. At the same time, we are pressed to re ﬂ ect. Through re ﬂ ection, we become 
33
2 Reading and Rereading the  Ideen in Japan
aware of our own culturality and how we are determined by its appearances and its 
modes of experience. We awake from our self-forgetfulness, but at the same time 
fall into a new danger of self-forgetting. This is because we set ourselves outside the 
two cultures and think that we are looking at them from the outside, whereas both 
are contained in the one and only world, which is looked upon by a one and only 
ego. Both that world and I are unique, and yet, at the same time, culturally hybrid. 
This paper is in English, but was originally written (and conceived) in Japanese, was 
written in a script that originated in China, and is an extension of a philosophy that 
began in Europe. It is intercultural from the very  ﬁ rst word. 
 The shortcomings of  Ideen I are its merit, because its emphasis on re ﬂ ection and 
the ego can make us re ﬂ ect on our hybridity. It is a work that should be read—as 
I have read it, or perhaps failed in my reading—for its failures. 
35
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_3, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 In ﬂ uence on Stein 
 Interest in Edith Stein’s thought is growing among phenomenologists 1 and 
Neo-Scholastic philosophers after an overly long hiatus, 2 which resulted in leaving 
Stein interpretation mainly in the hands of critics who largely fail to appreciate 
Edmund Husserl’s in ﬂ uence on his student and assistant. Anxiety about in ﬂ uence 
 K. M.  Haney (*)
 Department of Woman, Culture and Society ,  University of St. Thomas ,  Houston ,  TX ,  USA 
e-mail:  khhaney@sbcglobal.net 
 Chapter 3 
 Edith Stein and Autism 
 Kathleen  M.  Haney  
 1  In  Body, Text and Science  (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997), 218, Marianne Sawicki 
writes, “… even the most astute philosophical commentaries on Stein rest content with giving a 
historical account of what she wrote. They do not discuss its social genesis, nor do they redirect any 
of Stein’s investigations or amend her results. This has the unfortunate effect of sealing Stein’s 
thought into the past, for without being bent and pruned it cannot grow into a living resource for 
today’s and tomorrow’s challenges.” She acknowledges Mary Catherine Baseheart’s  Person and 
World (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997), as a noteworthy exception. Since then there 
is Dermot Moran’s beautiful study, “Immanence, Self-Experience, and Transcendence in Edmund 
Husserl, Edith Stein and Karl Jaspers” in the  American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly , Spring 
2008, an issue dedicated to Edith Stein. Angela Ales Bello provides a measured analysis of “Edith 
Stein’s Contribution to Phenomenology” in  Analecta Husserliana,  Volume LXXX, ed. Anna-Teresa 
Tymieniecka (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002) and in “Causality and Motivation in 
Edith Stein,”  Causality and Motivation,  ed. Roberto Poli (Heusenstamm bei Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag 
2010). Corinne M. Painter applies Stein’s work in her 2007, “Phenomenology and the Non-Human 
Animal,” in  Appropriating the Philosophies of Edmund Husserl and Edith Stein: Animal Psyche, 
Empathy, and Moral Subjectivity  (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2007). This is a small 
sampling of research published on Stein recently.  
 2  Antonio Calcagno in  The Philosophy of Edith Stein (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 
2007), 2, suggests that sexism may be a cause. Also, many Catholic scholars are only recently 
revisiting their Scholastic heritage and becoming open to Stein’s recuperation of it, following 
Karol Wojtyla among others. 
36
K.M. Haney
may entail (1) reopening the question of the reliability of the text of  Ideen II , 
particularly Part 2, Chapter 4; (2) suggesting a proper ordering of naturalistic and 
personalistic worlds; and (3) re ﬂ ecting on Stein’s critique of transcendental idealism 
which suggests how transcendental realism cashes out in a science of 
philosophy. 3  
 To evaluate the in ﬂ uence of the  Ideen on Stein, we must go back to her reading 
of  Logische Untersuchungen . Edith Stein began at Breslau, where she was occupied 
principally with psychology, since her primary interest was, from the beginning, the 
person. 4 After four semesters, she became dissatis ﬁ ed and was increasingly drawn 
towards Göttingen and Husserl. Stein writes of herself in her introduction to 
 Endliches und Ewiges Sein , “Her philosophic home is the school of Edmund Husserl, 
and her philosophic mother tongue is the language of the phenomenological thinkers.” 5 
She attended Husserl’s courses from 1913 to 1916 and he directed her dissertation, 
but we should not infer that she was a Husserlian phenomenologist per se. 
 Along with other Göttingen students, she saw a renewal of Scholasticism in  Logische 
Untersuchungen , 6 but was herself more interested in revisionary realism than Christian 
or even Greek philosophy. Husserl’s 1913 publication then seemed to rescind the promises 
of his earlier work, since he speci ﬁ ed in  Ideen I that intersubjectivity was the guarantor 
of “an objective outer world.” 7 “Reinach and his students read  Ideen I as a lapse into a 
sort of Kantianism” 8 and Kantianism was what they were all set to avoid. 9  
 3  See  Potenz und Akt , Band XIX of  Edith Steins Werke 18 (Freiburg: Herder, 1998), translated as 
 Potency and Act. Henceforth  (PA). Walter Redmond . (Washington D.C.: ICS, 2009). 
 4  Archivum Carmelitanum Edith Stein Band VII, Ausdem Leben einer Judischen Familie, Das 
Leben EdithStein: Kindheit und Jugend (Druten: R. Bosman, 1985). OCD as  Life in a Jewish 
Family , trans. Josephine Koeppel (Washington D.C.: ICS, 1986), 186. Henceforth, LJF. 
 5  Edith Stein,  Endliches und ewiges Sein: Versuch eines Aufstiegs zum Sinn des Seins,  Edith Steins 
Werke 2 (Louvain: E. Nauwelaerts, and Freiburg: Herder, 1950) and Edith Stein Gesamtausgabe 
11/12 (Freiburg: Herder, 2006). Translated from the 1950 edition as  Finite and Eternal Being: An 
Attempt at an Ascent to the Meaning of Being, trans. Kurt F. Reinhardt (Washington, D.C.: Institute 
of Carmelite Studies Publications, 2002), 12. Henceforth  ES . 
 6  “The  Logische Untersuchungen had caused a sensation primarily because it appeared to be a radi-
cal departure from critical idealism which had a Kantian and neo-Kantian stamp. It was considered 
a ‘new scholasticism’ because it turned attention away from the ‘subject’ and toward ‘things’ 
themselves. Perception again appeared as reception, deriving its laws from objects not, as criticism 
has it, from determination which imposes its laws on the objects. All the young Göttingen phenom-
enologists were con ﬁ rmed realists. However, the  Ideen I included some expressions which sounded 
very much as though their Master wished to return to idealism.” (LJF, 250.) 
 7  “In his course on nature and spirit, Husserl had said that an objective outer world could only be 
experienced intersubjectively, i.e., through a plurality of perceiving individuals who relate in a 
mutual exchange of information.” (LJF, 269.) 
 8  Karl Schuhmann, “Husserl’s Yearbook,”  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50, 
Supplement (Autumn, 1990): 1–25. 
 9  Calcagno in  The Philosophy of Edith Stein , p. 17, writes, “Other philosophers, including Ingarden, 
Scheler, and Conrad-Martius, chided Husserl for his transcendental turn. They, and Stein, contin-
ued to follow the phenomenological approach inspired by Husserl prior to his transcendental turn, 
resulting in the production of a vast corpus of work that remains in archives and libraries but that 
has not been fully investigated and studied.” 
37
3 Edith Stein and Autism
 Stein completed her thesis,  Zum Problem der Einfühlung , in 1916, having proposed 
the topic to Husserl in 1913 to  ﬁ ll a gap in  Ideen I. Although empathy carries the burden 
of accounting for the constitution of the other within the I’s own consciousness to 
ensure a shared world that can overcome naïve realism, Husserl only speci ﬁ es  the task 
that empathy is to perform. In,  Ideen I , he neglects to ask what empathy is or how it 
operates. 10  “Husserl had said that an objective outer world could only be experienced 
intersubjectively,” i.e., through a plurality of perceiving individuals who relate in a 
mutual exchange. Accordingly, experience of other individuals is prerequisite. Husserl 
gave the name  Einfühlung (empathy), an application of the work of Theodor Lipps, to 
experience of the inner lives of others. Stein notes, “What it consists of, however, he 
nowhere detailed. Here was a lacuna to be  ﬁ lled; therefore, I wished to examine what 
empathy might be.” 11 Although Husserl was inclined towards Lipps’s account of 
empathy, 12 Stein critiqued all of her predecessors including T. Lipps, Hugo Munsterberg, 
and especially Max Scheler, 13 whom she says does not use the term “empathy” as she 
is using it. 14 Stein wrote to Ingarden that Husserl had “con ﬁ ded that he was very satis ﬁ ed 
with my thesis, 15 and that, indeed, a good bit of it coincided with essential parts of Book 
II of  Ideen. ” 16 We will re ﬂ ect on this statement when we turn to some of the concerns 
about that text. 17  
 10  Husserl acknowledges that empathy provides insuf ﬁ cient grounds for evidence of other sub-
jects. Edmund Husserl  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, I. Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phanomenologie.  (Halle: Max 
Niemeyer Verlag, 1913).  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy , trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1983). “The inter-
subjective world is the correlate of the intersubjective experience, i.e., experience mediated by 
‘ empathy. ’ We are, as a consequence, referred to the multiple unities of things pertaining to the 
senses which are already individually constituted by the many subjects; in further course we are 
referred to the corresponding perceptual multiplicities thus belonging to different Ego-subjects 
and streams of consciousness; above all, however, we are referred to the novel factor of empathy 
and to the question of how it plays a constitutive role in ‘Objective’ experience and bestows 
unity on those separated multiplicities.” (363)  
 11  LJF, 269. 
 12  Ibid. 
 13  As Waltraut Stein wrote in her “Preface to the First and Second Editions” of her translation,  On 
The Problem of Empathy , trans. Waltraut Stein (Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications, 1989), xiv. 
Henceforth PE. “Scheler considered Stein’s analysis so pertinent that he referred to it three times 
in the second edition of (this work ( Sympathiegefuhle ) 1923).” 
 14  Ibid., 27. 
 15  “The Master had joked: ‘Your thesis pleases me more and more. I have to be careful that my 
satisfaction with it doesn’t get too exalted.’” (LJF, 410.) 
 16  Edith Stein,  Self Portrait In Letters 1916–1942 ,trans. Josephine Koeppel, ed. Dr. L. Gelber and 
Romaeus Leuven, O.C.D. (Washington, D.C.: Institute of Carmelite Studies, 1993), 1. 
 17  Sawicki’s  Body, Text and Science is the standard resource for the chronology of  Ideen II . The 
present study has extensively relied on its research. Further scholarship into the in ﬂ uence that Stein 
had on the text of  Ideen II and the signi ﬁ cance of its supplements must take Sawicki’s account 
seriously. As the reader shall see, this commentator differs with Sawicki due to my own non-
pernicious interpretation of Husserl’s “transcendental idealism.” From mid-October 1916 to 
38
K.M. Haney
 When Husserl was 76 years old and in failing health, he lamented to Sister 
Adelgundis Jaegerschmid that people understood him poorly. They had not followed 
his “inner turn” away from the  Logische Untersuchungen . “Even Edith Stein accom-
panied me only until 1917.” 18 Stein reported to Ingarden in February 1917 a fruitful 
conversation with Husserl that, although it had not established a consensus between 
them, had provided her with insight into her own thought, 19 which became a full-blown 
transcendental realism (since she required subjective consciousness acting upon the 
material given). 
 Following Stein’s move into metaphysics, we wonder if she adopted a diminished 
version of the phenomenological reduction or perhaps even slipped back into a 
naturalism that sidetracked Husserl’s foundational aspirations. If she made  her turn 
in 1917, before then in the years she was writing her dissertation she was, as Husserl 
says, following him, at least provisionally. We should not be surprised then if strong 
echoes resonate between  Zum Problem der Einfühlung and  Ideen II , which make it 
possible for Husserl to locate Stein’s analysis of empathy usefully within the 
personalistic world of  Ideen II. Yet we must wonder whether Stein smuggles her 
metaphysics into her second redaction of that work . 20 
 The in ﬂ uence of  Ideen I on Edith Stein may  ﬁ nally have led her to abandon 
Husserl’s aim for a rigorous science of philosophy. And, indeed, she herself puts 
forth a variety of this position in an interlude she included her 1931 work,  Potenz 
und Akt , her attempt at  Habilitation . Her appraisal of transcendental idealism argues 
February 1917, Edith Stein, no longer a student, but now Husserl’s  ﬁ rst assistant, re-visited the 
manuscript that Husserl wrote immediately after what became  Ideen I , 157. In the Introduction to 
their translation of  Ideen II , Rojcewicz and Schuwer comment, “In 1918, Stein completed her 
second redaction. This time her work involved much more than merely transcribing. By incorpo-
rating into the text writings of the folio and others from the war years, the main text of  Ideen II 
began to take its present form” (xii). That Stein took an active role in two of the manuscripts that 
became  Ideen II seems unarguable. See also Antonio Calcagno “Assistant and/or Collaborator? 
Edith Stein’s Relationship to Edmund Husserl’s  Ideen II, ”  Contemplating Edith Stein,  ed. Joyce 
Avrech Berkman (Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University Press, 2006), 243–270. 
 18  Adelgundis Jaegerschmid, O.S.B., “Conversations with Edmund Husserl, 1931–1938,”  The New 
Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy (Seattle: Noesis Press, Ltd., 
2001). Husserl reportedly said: “People even claim that I have retreated to Kant. That only shows 
the degree to which I have been misunderstood!” (338) And, “Yes, Thomas, I adore him—but he 
wasn’t a neo-scholastic either.” (346) 
 19  Stein wrote: “as a consequence [of the discussion] I have experienced a breakthrough. Now I 
imagine I know pretty well what ‘constitution’ is—but with a breakfrom Idealism. An absolutely 
existing physical nature on the one hand, a distinctly structured subjectivity on the other, seem to 
me to be prerequisites before an intuiting nature can constitute itself.” ( SP ,8) 
 20  According to Sawicki, 153–162, Stein composed §§43–47 (chapter 4 of Part Two). If this is the 
case, then Husserl may not be responsible for the infamous sentence that begins §47, “Empathy 
and the Constitution of Nature,” namely, “Empathy then leads, as we saw earlier, to the constitution 
of the intersubjective Objectivity of the thing and consequently also that of man, since now the 
physical Body is a natural-scienti ﬁ c Object.” Perhaps the entire chapter includes Stein’s closeted 
realism, rather than Husserl’s transcendental idealism. We will see that Husserl reverses the above 
constitutive order in the  Cartesianische Meditationen . 
39
3 Edith Stein and Autism
for transcendental realism on the basis that the body of the other can only be supposed 
to be animated. 21 Hypotheticals make no existential truth claims, however. Once 
presupposition enters into phenomenological system, one is free to choose among 
“beliefs.” 22 Her analysis of the  Cartesianische Meditationen shows her vaguely 
aware of the inadequacy of empathy to perform epistemological tasks of the  ﬁ rst 
order, but resigned to a systematic phenomenology that includes essential indeter-
minacy. “Now if we deem it reasonable, despite this possibility of being deceived, 
to maintain belief in the existence of other subjects independent of my own … what 
then prevents me from ascribing existence independent of my own to this body as 
well as to all other things that fall upon my senses, as does naïve belief in regard to 
perception and experience?” 23 Husserl’s transcendental idealism cannot take the 
animate body of the other for granted, as a given. Stein is correct that belief in 
“things that fall upon my senses” is naïve and being naïve, such belief exceeds the 
limits of Husserlian phenomenology. 
 Can we speculate that Husserl was cognizant that Stein’s belief that the body of 
the other led to a  deeper lacuna, which goes nearer to the heart of his phenomenology? 
Alfred Schutz recalls a conversation that suggests that the stakes may have been 
high for Husserl.
  Mrs. Biemel points out rightly that the problem of the constitution of the object in 
consciousness became during the  ﬁ fteen years in which Husserl worked on the manuscripts 
a main problem and the very task of phenomenology. In 1934 Husserl told the present 
author that he had left the second volume of the  Ideen unpublished, because he had not at 
that time found a satisfactory solution for the problem of intersubjectivity which he believed 
to have achieved in the Fifth  Cartesian Meditation . 24 
 The addition that Husserl makes is his account of a second order of appresentational 
pairing, which brings about a shared meaning with the other’s  Körper thereby 
transforming it into  Leib . We note two moments here:  ﬁ rst the constitution of the object 
body in simple immanence and secondly the animate body that results from discovering 
the animate body of the other in appresentational pairing. The evidence that can only 
result from mutually shared intentions enlivens a  Körper  that coalesces in a single 
paired meaning which can only come about through reciprocal meaning-making. 
Husserl deems that he has thus provided a solution to the problem that enticed Stein 
into the position of transcendental realism, what she saw as  the necessity of presuming 
that the object, the body of an other, was animated, as was the I’s own lived body . 
Husserl’s method requires him to show how an animate body presents itself thus, or 
risk undermining phenomenology with a retreat into presuppositions. 
 21  “The thing that is their body becomes evidence for me of a life of a subject that is analogous to 
my own life; it motivates in me the belief in an existence that is just as much an absolute for others 
as mine is for me.”(2009, 375) Motivated belief, however, is not  Evidenz . 
 22  See Stein’s introductory chapter in  Endliches und Ewiges Sein wherein she encourages the genuine 
philosopher to adopt Christian teachings in order to investigate where the hypothesis leads. 
 23  PA, 376. 
 24  Alfred Schutz, “Edmund Husserl’s Ideen, Volume II,”  Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 13, No 3 (Mar., 1953): 394–413. Quote from page 395. 
40
K.M. Haney
 In Husserl’s more complex account, an “I” appresents a pairing partner as united in 
one meaning with it, so that the other’s animate body shares the I’s own life. 
Appresentational pairing brings about a meaning at the “overlapping” of the intentions 
of both of the partners. However, only one of the partners’ experience is immediately 
available in an I’s lived consciousness. In a mutual exchange of reciprocal intentions, 
such pairs as nursing couples or dancing partners or team members reciprocally share 
the meanings that unite them. 25  
 Stein, with avowed realism, holds that we meet with others as we do with things 
in the world; they come to us from without. Husserl keeps his bet on methodological 
rigor. The stratum of immanent things speci ﬁ es the pathway of the Fifth Meditation 
as it resumes the problematic of  Ideen I. 26  The other’s animate body need not, as in 
Stein in 1931, 27  be taken to be besouled . The  ﬁ fth of the meditations shows how a 
real other can be nested within the I’s consciousness, as another subject, as well as 
the  ﬁ rst fully transcendent object and guarantor of an autonomous objective world. 
 An Application to Understanding Autism 
 No wide consensus prevails about what “Autism” is or about what causes it, 
although many are now coming to believe that the functional sources of autism 
(genetic or environmental) can be found in neuro-processing disorders. All we 
know with certainty is that the numbers of children and adults presenting with 
autism spectrum disorders continue to increase dramatically. Typical diagnostic 
symptoms of ASDs (Autistic Syndrome Disorder) include little or no eye contact, 
little or late language development, self-simulative or self-mutilative behaviors, 
clumsiness, lack of imaginative play, hyper- or hypo-tonic sensitivities, dif ﬁ culties 
with the digestive system, etc. Husserl might describe these de ﬁ ciencies as disor-
ders that prevent syntheses over sensory  ﬁ elds so that the developing conscious-
ness can eventually constitute stable objects across sensory  ﬁ elds. And, the child 
learns to call these objects by names given in a mother tongue. Perhaps hyper or 
hypo sensitivities to hyletic data in one or several sensory strata or inability or 
limitations in coordinating sensory  ﬁ elds or maybe even de ﬁ cits in passive 
 25  Here we move into “communities of higher orders” of interest to both Husserl and Stein in their 
later work. See the CM and K Manuscripts and  Jahrbuch fur Philosophie und Phanomenologische 
Forschung 7 (1925): 1–123. Edith Stein,  An Investigation Concerning the State, trans. Marianne 
Sawicki (Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications, 2006). 
 26  Husserl’s analysis in §151 of “Strata of the Transcendental Constitution of the Thing. 
Supplementary Considerations,” begins in primordial empirical consciousness that develops into 
the personal doxic worlds, as we see in thematized in his later genetic analyses. 
 27  Although the stratum of immanence can achieve unities such as bodies recognized as things 
through acts of association of sensory experience, the thing body of the other takes on the sense of 
substantial-causal thing before becoming independent of the nexus of consciousness. 
41
3 Edith Stein and Autism
receptivity itself (what Stein calls the “life force”) inhibit autistic consciousness 
from recognizing an other as autonomous and talking to him or sharing “objects” 
with him. What we do know is that autistic progression amounts to a history of 
delay, deviation, splinter skills, and quirks. Even the term, “autism,” from the 
Greek “auto” suggests an unnatural preoccupation with the “self,” unnatural since, 
as both Husserl and Stein recognize, the human  telos  is the other. 28 Nevertheless, 
since consciousness is “consciousness of,” autistic consciousness too must make 
meanings. 
 The world of autistic consciousness is notoriously opaque to natural scientists or 
parents who assume that its horizon is the world that presents itself within the 
personalistic attitude that Husserl depicts in  Ideen II . If the degree of the severity of 
ASDs links to failure to grasp others empathically, then without others, there can 
be no experience of a single shared world of intersubjectivity. As we shall see, the 
autistic child or adult can experience others, but until he develops empathy he remains 
on the spectrum, since he only constitutes others as mundane objects, “mere things,” 
in the naturalistic attitude that is the topic of  Ideen I . The personalistic and natu-
ralistic attitudes are marked by distinguishing the world of persons and values from 
the world of “objects” whose values are quanti ﬁ able, though not “felt.” People 
on the autistic spectrum may inhabit the later world, but the former is the limit of 
their disability. 
 Leo J. Kanner  ﬁ rst described “Early Infantile Autism” in 1943. Around the 
same time, but unbeknownst to each other, Hans Asperger in Vienna wrote about 
a similar condition. Presently “high-functioning autism” and “Asperger’s Syndrome” 
are often used interchangeably. It may prove useful to tease them apart on 
the basis of the preferred hemisphere of the brain for each type, though such 
speculation is well beyond the scope of this paper. Practitioners now agree that 
each autistic person is an overly unique individual, since (s)he is not “neuro-
typical.” Developing theories of types nevertheless may be useful both to the 
understanding and treatment. Psychologists followed as the early researchers into 
what are now called Autistic Spectrum Disorders. Taking off from Kanner’s 
description of aloof, overly intellectual mothers, Bruno Bettleheim infamously 
blamed “refrigerator mothers” for the inadequate nurturance that prevents autistic 
children from developing a sense of self. 
 Instead, the current understanding among practitioners amounts to a kind of awe for 
most of the parents of spectrum children, especially the mothers, for their dedication to 
their disabled, often dif ﬁ cult children. For instance, institutionalized adults on the spec-
trum are not always toilet-trained. If the dimension of self-feelings does not accompany 
motoric acts, we would expect training to be very dif ﬁ cult. Even a devoted mother may 
not be able to pair with her child, if he cannot constitute her, synthesizing adumbrations 
 28  Manuscript E-III-5 transcribed by Marly Biemel in 1952. Reprinted from  Telos 4 (Fall 1969). 
“Universal Teleology,”  Husserl: Shorter Works , trans. Marly Biemel, eds. Peter McCormick and 
Frederick Elliston (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), 335–337. Edith Stein, 
 Die Frau (Louvain: E. Nauwelaerts, 1959);  Woman , trans. Freda Mary Oben (Washington, D.C.: 
Institute of Carmelite Studies, 1996). See especially pp. 94–97. 
42
K.M. Haney
across sensory  ﬁ elds. 29 He may not be capable of enjoying feelings of warmth, touch, 
familiarity, nourishment. This is to say that the most severely autistic infant cannot 
readily participate in the paired meaning, baby/mama. In efforts to avoid further hurt 
and blame to the majority of parents who sacri ﬁ ce mightily for their children, practitio-
ners have too often jettisoned the psychological dimension altogether. 
 Persuasive developmental disorders effect the entire soul, as with the Greeks, the 
principle of animation, as well as object constitutions. The task we shall take on is 
explaining why this is the case. From a phenomenological perspective, persons with 
ASDs, for whatever reasons, fail in the orderly progression of constitutions that result 
in consciousness of a shared world of self and others. To apply phenomenological 
method and discoveries to autism is long overdue. The natural scientists who theorize 
about autism do so on the basis of the naturalistic world attitude. We propose instead 
to assume the position of the transcendental phenomenological reduction. The guiding 
clue will be autistic consciousness, as we see it at work in the meanings that autistic 
persons make as they exhibit them in their behaviors. We use empathy in order to do 
so. What we will  ﬁ nd is that people on the ASD spectrum, although they usually live 
in families, in relation to parents and siblings, do not engage in empathic acts. The 
affection that they show is infantile or childish rather than self-giving love. 
 Many naturalistic theories surmise dif ﬁ culties connecting the hemispheres of the 
autistic brain and espouse therapies that often rely on bodily movements. Consensus 
about typically autistic over and under sensory sensitivities (or more commonly, both 
in the same child) holds that such dif ﬁ culties lead to problems of sensory integration, 
which refers to the ordering of sensory information for practical ends. We would say 
that the wild life of the most severely autistic takes place against the background of the 
Ownness sphere of Husserl’s  ﬁ fth meditation. Integration of the senses (Aristotle’s 
 sensus communis ) is the next higher stage that shows itself with syntheses of the various 
sensory  ﬁ elds across time, as self-identical objects with multiple sensory dimensions 
knit together. Integration is not a skill that the neuro-typical child is taught, 30 although 
the ability to associate is generally thought of as indicative of intelligence so that 
neuro-typical individuals seem to be disposed to higher or lower ability. 
 29  Tito Rajarshi Mukhopadhyay graphically describes his mother’s determined intrusions into his 
autistic mind, which enabled his development.  How Can I Talk If My Lips Don’t Move? (New 
York: Arcade Publishing, 2008). Temple Grandin expresses similar gratitude for her mother’s persis-
tence, see especially  Emergence Labeled Autistic (New York: Warner Books, reissued April 2005). 
Clara Claiborne Park’s classic  The Siege (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1982) conveys her 
efforts as the parent of an autistic child in her dedication: “To those behind walls, and to all their 
besiegers.” 
 30  Regardless of the initial deterrent to development, Connolly and Craig write: “Ten modalities provide 
sensory input that must be organized and processed by human subjects: (1) touch and pressure, (2) 
kinesthetic, (3) the vestibular system, (4) temperature, (5) pain, (6) smell, (7) taste, (8) vision, (9) audition, 
and (10) the common chemical sense. Each modality has a special type of sensory receptor (end organ) 
that is sensitive only to certain stimuli, and each as a separate pathway from the sensory receptor up the 
spinal cord to the brain. Sensory systems especially important to motor learning are: tactile and deep 
pressure, kinesthetic, vestibular and visual. When these systems exhibit ‘delayed’ or ‘atypical’ function, 
motor development and/or learning is affected.” Maureen Connolly and Tom Craig, “Stressed 
Embodiment: Doing Phenomenology in the Wild,”  Human Studies 25, 4 (2002): 451–62.  
43
3 Edith Stein and Autism
 ABA (Applied Behavior Analysis) is the warhorse of therapies for autistic children 
in the United States. It involves an extrinsic reward for desired behaviors, including 
eventually praise as reward (the ubiquitous “good job”). These repetitions of behaviors, 
often those the neuro-typical child incorporates spontaneously or easily, may serve 
to make develop memorial connections. The late Dr. Stanley Greenspan’s therapies 
“Floortime,” 31 the norm in Canada, emphasize circles of communication and 
concomitant emotional attachment. 
 Phenomenologically, the success of the variety of therapies suggests the many 
dimensions to the phenomenon of autism. It may be the case that some children 
require behavioral training. Some behaviors, although expressive of the autistic 
child’s feelings, inhibit his ability to initiate or even to respond to exchanges of 
meanings with the not-I. Behaviors such as bashing their heads, biting themselves, 
spinning, rocking, tracking dust specs (all common autistic behaviors) distract some 
children from turning to the pre-other with intentional regard. As Maxine Sheets-
Johnstone shows, 32 the roots of cognition are motoric acts which arise out of internal 
states. These need not link to autistic experience of a “pre-other.” On the other hand, 
in normal development, motoric and kineaesthic acts coordinate with affect―the 
infant hears the mother’s voice and reaches his arms out to her, so that the “pre-object” 
is animated by the mutual pairing with the parent who picks him up. 33 
 Husserl’s emphasis on the constitution of the other within consciousness provides 
a template for child development, an analogy he himself makes in Section 61 of his 
Fifth Meditation, when he takes up the question of “psychic genesis.” 
Phenomenological methodology suggests this line of inquiry since “every child 
must build up his ‘idea of the world.’” 34 Husserl denies that sense experience auto-
matically gives itself within the context of the shared world. And we see this in 
otherwise neuro-typical blind or deaf infants. These children usually come into our 
shared world, obviously with constituted objects that most of us can only imagine, 35 
yet with a common horizon in the one spatial/temporal world whereas many people 
with ASDs never do. People with Autism Syndrome Disorder remain on the spectrum 
until they join into the intersubjective constitution of the personalistic world. 
 We will investigate acts and concomitant stages of consciousness leading to 
intersubjective, empathic being-with-others (not only  Mitsein ) in a shared world of 
worlds, including professional, personal, and spiritual dimensions in communities 
of higher orders. This world is the natural attitude (although not the naturalistic) of 
“neuro-typical” individuals. Severely autistic children do not indicate by gestures or 
 31  Stanley I. Greenspan and Serena Wider,  Engaging Autism (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 
Perseus Books Group, 2006). 
 32  Maxime Sheets-Johnstone,  The Primacy of Movement (Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 1999), 252. 
 33  My use of the masculine pronoun throughout is indicative of the preponderance of males on the 
spectrum. 
 34  CM, 141. 
 35  Blind people often speak of being able to “feel” colors. See Oliver Sachs,  An Anthropologist on 
Mars (New York: Vintage Books, 1995) for further examples of atypical consciousness. 
44
K.M. Haney
language that they participate in this linguistic, intersubjective, and shared world. 
Husserlian genetic phenomenology can provide a structure for autistic development 
if we analyze “abnormal” on the basis of “normal” or neuro-typical learning that 
embodies the constitutive  a priori . 36 Consciousness is “autistic” to the extent it fails 
to enliven the  a priori through its acts. Neuro-typical consciousness, on the other 
hand, enacts its telos to open to the world and others. 
 Before we apply the constitutive  a priori to an analysis of autism, we shall brie ﬂ y 
rehearse its relevant stages:
 1.  When the (m)other meets the infant at birth; she obtrudes (intrudes with the 
intention bringing out) upon his passive receptivity. Most babies must learn to 
nurse. Insofar as the child is open to his “I cans” and enacts them in normal 
infantile autism, he becomes skilled at participating in paired meanings, although 
he does not immediately intend them in such a sophisticated fashion. Most 
infants can imitate an adult sticking out her tongue in the  ﬁ rst hour of his life, 
while lacking notions of his or her or tongue. Nevertheless, he is ready to learn 
about his individuality and humanity in the culture of his family beginning with 
these pre-egoic experiences of phantom objects.  
 2.    In the second level of consciousness, immanent objectivity, the child enjoys a 
symbiotic relationship with the mothering partner that gradually extends outwards 
to his father, his siblings, and other caregivers. His (m)other is not fully independent 
of him, according to the meaning that the child grants to her. Initially, she and his 
other “part-objects,” derive their meanings only as extensions of his own “pre-ego.” 
The infant engages in acts of shared attention that lead to independent objects in 
the one spatio/temporal world, after the fusion between the pair, mother and child 
sunders into their separate identities. 37  
 3.  When the other becomes a real person, i.e., an alter ego who exists autonomously, 
with its own desires and purposes, the world becomes truly objective, i.e., inter-
subjective. Object constitution in the strong sense of transcendent to and independent 
of the particular constituting consciousness results from its different appearances 
in the perspectives of the originary ego and its partner. No longer his meaning 
only, the world becomes a nexus of shared meanings. The language-using child 
grasps its world in the shared names; he has learned a mother tongue. Others 
become more than dependent transcendent objects that derive their meanings 
from the child’s interest. The child learns that some objects are themselves also 
subjects in a shared spatio/temporal world. This world is a symbolic world that the 
child experiences in the iconography of his culture. His acts of empathy gradually 
 ﬁ ll in the space between persons who share a common time. This development is 
the normal ful ﬁ llment of the motivations that began in the reciprocally shared 
obtrusions on the lowest level. The recognition of a world, constituted as 
 36  CM, 125. 
 37  We know from experiences with adolescents that separate identities are not established easily or 
completely during this early period of development, but the normal overlapping of the pair mother-
child begins to pull apart well before the teenage years. 
45
3 Edith Stein and Autism
independent, inhabited by others who are not me, moves the I to transcend itself 
into a world and others. The telic drive towards the other is on its way.  
 We may think of autistic development as more or less “stuck” on a foundational level 
“beneath” the shared world of objects, others, and self. The young infant or severely 
autistic child does not recognize causal objects, since he has not synthesized various 
 ﬁ elds of sense experience into self-identical objects. The naturalistic attitude gives 
objects as determining parts of its consciousness, unless its naturalism is based on the 
prior constitution of the personal world. Without others, the autistic self experiences 
existence, even that resistant to his will, as dependent on him as its source .  
 In addition to the  constitutive apriori that leads to the natural world, the world of 
 Ideen I , the second volume shows the constitution of the personal world. As early as 
 Ideen I , 38  Husserl distinguished the above three levels of objectivity, corresponding 
to levels of consciousness, although he waited to sketch them out in genetic analysis. 
As we have seen, Husserl recognized that the intersubjective levels require working 
out in some speciﬁ city. In outline, however, beginning in originary consciousness, a 
sphere of immanence, disclosed in the so-called “second reduction,” the pre-ego 
dwells in polymorphous ownness, before otherness. It lacks awareness of a distinc-
tion such as self/non-self. This pre-ego functions anonymously and with only pre-
cognitive regard for its own virtualities, although it embodies them. This world is 
primordial, a dwelling for a pre-ego and its phantom objects. 
 A next higher level of consciousness includes the meaning, transcendent, although 
not in the strong sense of independent of its constituting subject’s consciousness. 
A transcendent immanent object presents itself most fully as a causal object that is not 
yet autonomous to the intending ego. This doxic level does not necessarily include real 
others. Husserl is very clear: transcendent, autonomous objects are objects for others as 
well. Independent objects exist for a consciousness if and only if that consciousness has 
constituted others as independent of its own processes: the ﬁ rst real object is the other. 
 The personalistic world of  Ideen II is an intersubjective, objective world of 
persons and the products of their spirits, their meanings. It arises as a shared 
achievement in a community or cultural world. Although this world must be 
grasped in the acts of a subject, since the subject grasps others who recognize and 
re ﬂ ect him, this subjectivity is not pernicious. We recall that in Husserl’s phenom-
enological epistemology, grasp of an I, other than the I of the initiating ego, 
ensures that the world is not solipsistic—it is not mine alone. Lacking real others, 
the severely autistic person is alone in his own world.  
 The Husserl/Stein Theory of Intersubjectivity Applied to ASDs 
 Metaphysical differences aside, the animate body of the other that results from 
appresentational pairing in Husserl and the presumed animate body of the object/other 
in Stein share a starting point in the other as another animate organism. In  Ideen II , 
 38  Ideas I , 363–364. 
46
K.M. Haney
we see that the psychical level is common to animal as well as to human life. At the 
level of consciousness of the personal world, we see that Stein’s doctrine of empathy 
complements as well as supplements Husserl’s constitutive phenomenology. 
 As discussed, Stein and Husserl differ concerning the immediate basis of acts of 
appresentational pairing, yet they both af ﬁ liate such acts with meanings shared with the 
other’s animate body, and a subject who re ﬂ ects on making meanings. But, according to 
Husserl, when a meaning can only result from a reciprocal overlapping (of the I’s 
meaning-making and the other’s meaning-making) of intentions, the partner reveals an 
unknown meaning-making subject in the other’s animate body. If the pairing structure 
presents the I as body and soul, it presents the body of the other directly through 
sensation and the animated life, the soul, of the meaning-making other indirectly, as an 
appresentation, given empathically. Before the other is present to consciousness as 
bodily object, there can be no appresentations of the whom of the other; without the 
presentation of the other as self-identical object, the that of the other is not present to 
consciousness, as such. The most severely autistic persons are unable to follow the  telos 
of the  constitutive apriori  so that they do not constitute their early experiences of 
“pre-others” into others as alter egos. The content of earliest appresentations of the pre-other 
(more or less empty) is a necessary condition for the possibility of the meaning of the 
pair as well as for the development of the faculty of empathy, as “the means of knowing 
the other,” as Stein has it. Unlike their neuro-typical peers, children and adults on the 
autism spectrum pair with others minimally and often in non-reciprocal ways. 
 The symbiotic unions that spectrum people establish with others have to do with 
performing functions, although the typical sharing of egos is not evident. 39 The 
“other” is useful to the autistic child to turn on a faucet or to reach cookies on a high 
shelf. Unlike the attached infant whose symbiosis includes its need and desire for 
the person (this one person, one mama, as well as the goods she provides), autistic 
symbiosis expresses desire for things. Expanding on the notion that the naturalistic 
world, when not founded on the personalistic one, results from colonialization rather 
than indigenous growth we see that “persons” can exist as meaning-making beings 
only within the personalistic world. The high-functioning person who learns sym-
bols before or without knowing psychic life cannot recognize re ﬂ ective values. 
Why? Because, both Husserl and Stein  ﬁ nd ultimate value in persons. Behavioral 
evidence will not allow us to maintain that autistic persons are devoid of self-feel-
ings or of deep relationships with others. Yet, insofar as persons on the spectrum lack 
empathy, they remain related to the relationship, to mother, father, sibling, grandma, 
to the other person in one of its roles, rather than to a real other who is more than 
any of its roles. Although the person on the spectrum may name the partners in his 
twosomes, threesomes, family, they must be poorly individuated, since one on the 
spectrum lacks the capacity for empathy that makes the individuation of self and 
other possible. 
 39  “Eventually I distinguished people from things and nature, and came to think of them as people-
objects: second-rate, distant, dif ﬁ cult to comprehend but usable. I learned to function” (Op. cit. 
Williams, 70). 
47
3 Edith Stein and Autism
 Parents reach out to their children to claim them as their own in the shared world. 
But these infants cannot spontaneously take up their side of the meaning-making 
necessary to pairing. Parents may share their autistic children’s focus, intentionally 
turning towards what interests him, but what is the parent to do when the child fails 
to initiate? “Look” says the neuro-typical 2-year old. “Boat” replies the parent. 
Failure to initiate or engage in activities of joint attention is another symptom on the 
low end of the spectrum. “But there is also another type of autism—the most 
low-functioning one—where we have no proof of the continuity in the behavior, 
where the existence of retention/protention structure seems absent.” 40 As we shall 
see, the difference between the naturalistic world as “mere things” and the intersub-
jective shared world of living beings results from communication with others. 
 In  Das Kind, Husserl describes acts of empathy as indicating a gestalt revolution 
has taken place. 41 Consciousness has entered into the personal world that includes 
independent, transcendent objects as well as real others. We see such meaning-
making acts as neuro-typical children make their way into the shared world. And 
noticeably, severely autistic children may never make the meanings that acknowledge 
other, self, and world. According to Husserl, the normal child evidences empathic 
behaviors between the ages of three and  ﬁ ve. Thus, empathy or lack thereof can be 
a marker for delayed development on the autistic spectrum. In other words, empathic 
acts announce consciousness’s ascent to the level of the personal world, the awareness 
of a world of persons that autistic behaviors do not display. 42 Stein writes about the 
personalistic world, when she says: “Consciousness as a correlate of the object 
world is not nature, but spirit.” 43 
 Low-performing autistic children routinely walk into other people, although 
their vision may be within the typical range according to ordinary testing measures. 
The impaired autistic child who does not “notice” the “giveness” of other animate 
bodies performs within a sphere of primordiality that gives the lie to his chrono-
logical age. 44 As we would expect, Husserl’s innate apriori must be concretized in 
experience that will later provide the basis for the ego’s self-apperception. So, we 
must wonder about a child who trips over other animate bodies or bumps into them 
(he may even run them over if the others are little).The autistic child’s intention, 
however  ﬂ eeting and impulsive, occupies his consciousness. He has not made 
“room” for others in a world of self and others. 
 40  Yasuhiko Murakami, “On The Future—Autism and Temporality” (paper presented at The Future 
of Applied Phenomenology: The Second Conference of Phenomenology as Bridge between East 
and West, Seoul, Korea 11–13 February 2007), 137. 
 41  Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie Der Intersubjektivät Dritter Teil: 1929–1935, ed. Iso 
Kern (Den Haag: Martinus Nifhoff, 1973), 604–608. 
 42  Although Husserl’s power in explicating an essential level of object constitution suggests that his 
rigorous foundationalism is necessary for grounding empathetic acts and their correlates, Stein’s 
analysis of empathy completes the constitution of the shared world as the personalistic world. 
 43  PE, 91. 
 44  An interesting note here is that autistic children often keep babyish features well beyond what 
their age would dictate. 
48
K.M. Haney
 Husserl, Stein, and followers could perhaps reply that the body of the autistic 
child must have sensory impairments that prevent typical development. Yes, but 
what we are saying is that the  ﬁ rst experiences of the primal ego and its “pre-objects” 
take their place along the  constitutive apriori , which leads to openness to others and 
thus to its telic ful ﬁ llment. In other words, persons appropriately typed as autistic 
have not constituted the other as alter ego. The other is not independent of the originary 
I’s consciousness, but neither are its objects. 
 The given reality of a lived body establishes its emotional, sensory, cognitive, 
and evaluative powers. Since a primal level is missing from Stein’s account, her 
analysis of the animate body of the other as simple giveness does not consider the 
meanings that autistic children do make. When we incorporate Stein into a full 
account of intersubjectivity, we do well to consider the autistic trajectory as tending 
towards the next level of consciousness, the personal world, introduced by empathy 
with animate bodies that share paired meanings. 
 Empathy, according to Stein, is  the means  for knowing the other. Since our goal is 
a better grasp of Pervasive Developmental Disorders (ASDs), and the other is the  telos 
of neuro-typical development, we must summarize Stein’s analysis. Empathy is not 
simply seeing the other as if the I were in his place. Such imaginative bi-location only 
yields the I in two locations. The other as other and “There” to the I’s “Here” stretches 
the visual  ﬁ eld so that not all perspective is that of the I. What seems certain is that 
even in basic bodily suffering, the autistic other may not feel hunger or thirst or pain 
as neuro-typical persons do. Common overreactions to auditory sensation suggest that 
the vacuum cleaner is painful to many autistic persons, not just annoying. As we learn 
from Donna Williams, autistic persons suffering from sensory overload may 
intentionally shut down a  ﬁ eld of sensory experience to ease stress. 45  
 Pairing with the neonate or the young autistic child amounts to mutual overlay of 
meanings; in this relationship, empathy need not be mutual or reciprocal. The infant 
cannot recognize the correlate of his hunger pains until the mother puts him to 
breast. The mother pairs with her baby as mother/child, a nursing couple. He follows 
her lead and behaves as a human infant. The point is that empathy, in its  ﬁ rst 
instances, begins with an other further along on the constitutive  a priori. 46 Empathy 
also  ﬁ lls in the other as this other by grasping his feelings in the I’s own feelings. 
The mother recognizes the baby’s cries of hunger or thirst or sleepiness and shows 
him where his feelings tend. Identifying his needs does not demand that she herself 
feel hungry or thirsty, although she probably is sleepy. Husserl is clear: acts of 
empathy imply relation, not a happy relation perhaps, but a preliminary pairing from 
within the pre-personalistic attitude. He notes that acts of mutual relation, pairing, are 
“especially pre-eminent in the acts of one-sided empathetic understanding of the life 
of the other.” 47 Corinne Painter makes a similar argument in her description of how 
 45  Donna Williams,  Nobody Nowhere (New York: Times Books, 1992), 195–198. 
 46  This makes sense of early references to spectrum children as feral. The psychic life of the wolf 
is not up to making the intrusions appropriate to introducing a child to his humanity. See Paul 
Collins,  Not Even Wrong (New York and London: Bloomsbury Press, 2005). 
 47  Ideas II , 204. 
49
3 Edith Stein and Autism
people know their pets and recognize their feelings. Even if my dog does not 
understand my often complex feelings, I can know him empathically. 48 
 Since empathy is  the means for knowing any other animate body, we must take 
care to distinguish between the subject who empathizes and the other subject, the 
non-I, the alien, the foreign other, the not-me. The mother presumably has fully 
developed the personalistic world along with the strong sense of objectivity that it 
entails. She is capable of re ﬂ ection on her acts, while the infant only acts without 
re ﬂ ection. The anachronistic fallacy lurks, unless we keep in mind that access to the 
infantile ego requires the second reduction, to primordiality, as Husserl shows in the 
 ﬁ fth of the  Cartesianische Meditationen . Even then, the parent’s ego does not identify 
with that of his child. Rather, the parent recognizes his child’s needs as other than 
his own—as an other who might enjoy being tickled or need to be burped. As anyone 
who has tried to quiet a screaming child knows, not just any attention from any adult 
will do. If an infant wants to nurse, his father with his bottle may not satisfy him. 
Indeed, this need to be understood never completely leaves us. We recall T.S. Eliot’s 
lament “That’s not what I meant. That’s not it at all.” 49 
 Through non-reciprocal empathy in the one who claims the human child and the 
pre-ego who is becoming a baby, the infant awakens to his feelings and his movements 
direct themselves towards his feelings. The mother’s re ﬂ ection of her neuro-typical 
child provides him with the one-sided means for knowing himself. This self is a 
preliminary self since his re ﬂ ection derives from his other half, his complement. In this 
early stage of development, the mother is a part-object according to object-relations 
theory, derived from projections and introjections. He initially takes on the identity he 
gives as given him, seeing himself in re ﬂ ection. 
 Communities of higher orders are likewise shared meanings, based on acts of empathy 
so even the high-functioning person on the ASD spectrum remains the outsider, the 
observer who lacks social skills and cannot comprehend most non-verbal cues. 
When we say that the person on the ASD spectrum lacks empathy, we mean that he 
lacks a solid grasp of the personalistic world, even though he has language and maybe 
excellent skills in computers or in mathematics. We again see empathy as gatekeeper. 
 Phenomenological analysis requires that we examine the thesis that all autistic 
persons live in a world of “mere things.” What composes the transcendentally 
necessary conditions for the possibility of the naturalistic world? How can it come 
about without emotional receptivity? Corinne Painter provides a scrutiny of the 
personal and natural attitudes that suggests that the naturalistic and personalistic 
worlds result from different orders of constitutive achievement. 50 So far in this 
chapter, we have followed the  constitutive apriori through its accomplishment of 
 48  Corinne Painter, “Appropriating the Philosophies of Edmund Husserl and Edith Stein: Animal 
Psyche, Empathy, and Moral Subjectivity,”  Phenomenology and the Non-Human Animal: At the 
Limits of Experience , ed. Corinne Painter and Christian Lotz (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007), 
97–115. 
 49  T. S. Eliot, “The Lovesong of J. Alred Prufrock,”  Collected Poems, 1909–1962 (New York: 
Harcourt Brace & Company, 1963), 7. 
 50  Op. cit. Painter. 
50
K.M. Haney
real objects, according to the methodological solipsism that Husserl practices in 
book I, muting the dimension of feelings. 
 Now we observe that people with “high-functioning” Autism or Asperger’s 
Syndrome 51 develop the naturalistic attitude, although without establishing it on the 
basis of a personalistic one. Their constitutive efforts fail to move beyond objects 
for the I’s consciousness to objects of a shared intentional world. The distinction 
that Husserl made after the  Cartesianische Meditationen between primordial and 
solipsistic worlds is clear to see in the lived worlds of the neonate and that of the 
high-functioning autistic teenager or adult. The neonate turns towards what affects 
it, opening to receive what is coming in, synchronizing his motoric “I can” with his 
emotional desires. Autistic affect is impoverished, maybe due to defects in sensing 
and associating, de ﬁ cient virtualities such as hyper-sensitivity to touch in the worst 
cases which can lead to downstream effects on memory and time constitution. 
 Conclusions 
 We have rehearsed the stages in the development of orders of immanent objectivities 
that Husserl sketched in  Ideen I  only to  ﬁ nd that cognitive development alone cannot 
suf ﬁ ce to advance to empathic grasp of the other. Empathy makes it possible for an I 
to feel the other’s feelings. Painter brings our attention to this passage from  Zum 
Problem der Einfühlung where Stein writes:
 If I experience a feeling as that of another, I have it given twice: Once primordially and 
my own and once non-primordially in empathy as originally foreign. And precisely this 
non-primordial empathized experience causes me to reject “inner perception” for the 
comprehension of our own and foreign experience. 52  
 Although Stein does not emphasize the following point or may not even agree 
with it, her analysis of empathy builds upon the structure of what Husserl terms 
appresentational pairing. Two “I’s” (an “I” and a “pre-I”) come together in a 
meaning that requires partners. With Husserl’s appresentational pairing, the other is 
foreign, alien, an “empty” intention, a “not-me,” a pairing partner. Husserl’s primor-
dial world includes others as given in the pre-I’s sensory experience that are not yet 
given as real others. Meanings such as my child, my friend, my colleague, or my 
enemy may present others naturalistically, as mundane objects in “the world,” “mere 
things” or as self-individuated persons. Empathy  ﬁ lls in the “empty” intention 
“other” as this unique person. In empathy, there can be a partial  ﬁ lling in of the 
intention that reaches towards the other. I’s can share good news and bad news, feeling 
joy at an other’s upcoming graduation or sadness at the loss of an other’s beloved 
 51  This is not the venue for speculation on the differences in the symptom complexes. DSM IV has 
preferred to obviate this discussion by categorizing them both as Autism Spectrum Disorders. 
 52  PE, 34. 
51
3 Edith Stein and Autism
sister. The I need not have a sister to feel this sadness since it does not originate 
from the I itself. 
 On the primordial level, the overlapping of the pair is sundered by the Here of the 
I and the There of the non-present part-other. When the desire of the primal ego seeks 
the not-present pre-other, necessarily the sense of the unity of the pair weakens. 
“Otherness” builds on the experience of the embodied other, when Stein’s theory of 
empathy is superimposed on Husserlian constitution of things. 
 The neuro-typical neonate can turn towards the other in passive affectivity. These acts 
“awaken” the (pre-)ego, so that such experiences slip into retentions that hypothesize the 
“same-again.” The various sensory systems develop into embodying the other as an 
object, another self which re ﬂ ects the primal self. Receptivity stirs the awakening of the 
ego. However, and Painter also notes this passage from  Ideen II :
 It should appear that there are not here two attitudes with equal rights and of the same 
order,…but that the naturalistic attitude is in fact subordinated to the personalistic, and that 
the former only acquires by means of an abstraction, or rather, by means of a kind of self-
forgetfulness of the personal Ego, a certain autonomy—whereby it proceeds 
illegitimately. 53 
 This  illegitimate autonomy  substitutes for “the genuinely natural (i.e., originary) 
attitude,” “wherein intersubjective relationships characterized by various non-theoretical 
modes of concern and care, for example, love, hate, aversion, attraction, etc. operate as 
the basis for meaning.” 54  When we apply this insight to high-functioning autistic people, 
we see that they remain on the spectrum until or unless they develop a grasp of the 
personalistic world. The ability of some high-functioning persons on the spectrum to 
enter into the activities and sciences of the naturalistic world attitude makes concrete the 
distinction that Husserl and Painter make. 55 It also makes us pause before Painter’s claim 
that the personalistic world provides “the context and point of departure for any and all 
abstract, theoretically motivated re ﬂ ections.” 56  
 High-functioning persons with Asperger’s Syndrome or Autism suggest that instead 
of the “self-forgetfulness of the personal Ego,” a failure to constitute a self-identical 
ego or a truncated sense of self may result in a constitution of the naturalistic world, 
albeit “illegitimate.” 57  Such individuals often process their experiences in the mathe-
matical languages, sometimes very successfully. High-functioning autistic people live 
 53  Op. cit. Painter, 101. Husserl, 193. 
 54  Ibid. Painter. 
 55  Indeed, the list of important  ﬁ gures in the past (Mozart, Einstein, Wittgenstein to name a few 
widely agreed upon) suggests that often the exceptional focus on special interests characteristic of 
this end of the ASD spectrum fuels exceptional abilities. 
 56  Op. cit. Painter 102. 
 57  Donna Williams wrote in  Somebody, Somewhere (New York: Times Books, 1994): “Autism had 
been there before I’d learned how to use my own muscles, so that every facial expression or pose 
was a cartoon re ﬂ ection of those around me. Nothing was connected to self. Without the barest 
foundations of self I was like a subject under hypnosis, totally susceptible to any programming and 
reprogramming without question or personal identi ﬁ cation. I was in a state of total alienation. This, 
for me, was autism.” (5.) 
52
K.M. Haney
in a naturalistic world that includes other persons as things, as mundane objects. They 
can continue developing in the naturalistic world, usually in the arts and sciences that 
use what were once called “the arti ﬁ cial languages,” those derived from the universal 
science of mathematics, including music. Dr. Temple Grandin provides an interesting 
deviation from the general rule. 
 When Grandin was still in high school, she constructed a “squeeze machine,” 
which would close in on her body with varying pressure depending on her need for 
an intense hug. 58 She writes:
 Because of sensory dysfunction, autistic children crave added tactile stimulation. They prefer 
(proximal) sensory stimulation such as touching, tasting as opposed to distant (distal) sensory 
stimulation of hearing or seeing. In the developing nervous system the proximal senses 
develop  ﬁ rst. In birds and mammals the tactile sense develops  ﬁ rst. 59 This may explain why a 
child with a damaged or immature nervous system prefers the proximal senses. 60  
 As we see, Grandin’s re ﬂ ection comes from her own experience; she herself was 
unable to tolerate touch except given in speci ﬁ c pressure. She writes poignantly 
about one particularly painful experience when her mother was leaving her tempo-
rarily (for therapy) in a boarding school. She remembers her mother saying:
 “I’ll miss you, Temple.” She walked quickly to my side and kissed my cheek. I ached to be 
enfolded in her arms, but how could she know? I stood rigid as a pole trapped by the 
approach/avoidance syndrome of autism. I drew back from her kiss, not able to endure 
tactile stimulation—not even loving, tactile stimulation. 61 
 In Temple Grandin herself we see evidence of “abnormal” symptoms that 
 nevertheless led her to the personalistic world and a meaningful life that allows her 
to empathize with her mother’s inability to know the feelings that her daughter did 
not show. By this controversial statement I mean that Professor Grandin’s life is rich 
in meanings, which are products of spirit. I think her outcome inspires many parents 
and practitioners since she illustrates the principles she writes about.
 …(M)aking a positive action out of a  ﬁ xation can be rewarding. A  ﬁ xation on a particular topic 
can lead to communication—perhaps isolated communication, but at least a break-through in 
communication. If properly guided, an autistic child can be motivated by a  ﬁ xation. 62  
 58  Dr. Grandin is renowned for transforming methods of slaughtering animals, her work as a profes-
sor at Colorado State University and her descriptive autobiographic works. See especially, Temple 
Grandin,  Thinking in Pictures (New York: Doubleday, 1995) and  Emergence Labeled Autistic 
(New York: Warner Books, 2005). 
 59  For Husserl, Stein and Merleau-Ponty, among others, touch is the  ﬁ rst sensory substrate to be 
synthesized into “self,” “own” and not-I since touching oneself is self-re ﬂ exive while touching 
objects reveals a resilience that may provide resistance. Touching a body which will come to be 
recognized as the body of an other is different again. The warm, soft  ﬂ esh which can be experi-
enced in touching is not the lived  ﬂ esh which is touched. When the infant feels the  ﬂ esh of the 
other, he intuits in the incomplete ful ﬁ llment of his intention that his body has boundaries. We note 
here that many severely autistic persons are hyper-sensitive to touch, seemingly from birth. Touch 
then cannot be readily synthesized or its epistemological clout cashed in. 
 60  Emergence , 37. 
 61  Emergence , 73. 
 62  Emergence , 40. 
53
3 Edith Stein and Autism
 A  ﬁ xation may become “obsessive-compulsive,” unless the autistic child  ﬁ nds an 
outlet in an other who responds. “A compulsive talking  ﬁ xation in a child can release 
some of the pent-up frustration and isolation that an autistic child so often feels.” 63 
Here we see non-reciprocal empathy in action since he may or may not be able to 
recognize his feelings. Grandin does well to recognize her mother’s importance in 
her own development. 
 Grandin’s many books over the years reveal her increasing membership in the 
personalistic world. An educator, William Carlock, who evaluated her “twenty 
years” before he was asked to write an introduction to the new edition of her book, 
said that “Temple’s intense focus was on the psychology of the cattle chute. And it 
was there that she found her way out of autism.” 64 Emergence from autism means 
entering into and living in the personalistic world. 
 Being one of the early self-reporting autistic persons, Grandin takes her own 
autistic symptoms as general autistic symptoms. We cannot stress enough, however, 
how unique each person on the syndrome is. The fundamental source of the delay 
and the systems of compensation and abilities are unique to each child. Again, autistic 
persons are more individual that neuro-typicals who share one sensory schema and 
with little halting or detours follow along the path of the constitutive apriori. Autistic 
development will not follow this path so that led by and diverted or trapped by 
weaknesses in core associations that lead to constant objects, the severely af ﬂ icted 
person lives in a primordial world, although high-functioning people on the spectrum 
can constitute cognitively. 
 Probably Grandin’s way of “thinking in pictures” is the way many high-functioning 
individuals enact the emphasis on the part over the whole that holds back many 
people on the spectrum. Let us now return to  Ideen II in order to see what is involved 
in the constitutions of the personalistic and naturalistic worlds so that we can apply 
this constitutive apriori to persons on the ASD spectrum.
 …the actual surrounding world of any person whatsoever is not physical reality pure and 
simple and without quali ﬁ cations, but instead it is the surrounding world only to the extent 
he “knows” of it, insofar as he grasps it by apperception and positing or is conscious of it in 
the horizon of his existence as co-given and offered to his grasp—clearly or unclearly, 
determinately or indeterminately—precisely in accordance with the way it happens to be 
posited by consciousness. 65 
 Neuro-typical development leads to subjects in a surrounding world with 
communal aspects which develop through “acts of personal mutual determination.” 
In the personalistic attitude, “it never occurs to him to ‘insert’ the spirit into the 
Body,” 66 i.e., to consider the spirit as something belonging with the body to a natural 
reality. “If it were carried out, then humans would themselves be posited as things.” 67 
 63  Ibid . , 41. 
 64  Ibid . , 7. 
 65  Ideas II , 195. 
 66  Ideas II , 200. 
 67  Ideas II , 200. 
54
K.M. Haney
We recall that empathy was a touchstone for consciousness since it brings with it the 
surrounding world of shared spirit, as well as this world’s independence from any 
particular consciousness. Husserl described high functioning autistic persons when 
he wrote,
 He who sees everywhere only nature, nature in the sense of, and, as it were, through the 
eyes of natural science, is precisely blind to the spiritual sphere, the special domain of the 
human sciences. Such a one does not see persons and does not see the Objects which depend 
for their sense on personal accomplishments, i.e., Objects of “culture.” Properly speaking, 
he sees no person at all…. 68 
 Yet,  “ the surrounding world constituted in experiencing others, in mutual 
understanding and mutual agreement, is designated as the communicative one.” 69 
 68  Ideas II , 201. 
 69  Ideas II , 203. 
55
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_4, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Clauss and Husserl’s  Ideen I 
 During the 1920s Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss (1892–1974) wrote three books which, 
among other things, sought to show that Husserlian phenomenology had made possible 
for the  ﬁ rst time a clear, rigorous, and differentiated concept of race of a kind which had 
been lacking to previous investigators. 1  He meant by that a concept of race which had 
left behind the natural sciences to take its rightful place in research on the soul. 2 
Phenomenology could play this role on his account because it provided a way of gain-
ing insight into the laws of the soul. Clauss had studied with Husserl. We know that 
Clauss, along with Roman Ingarden, had already participated in Husserl’s seminar on 
the theory of judgment in the Winter semester 1917–1918, and he was examined for 
 das Höhere Lehramt by Husserl in November 1919. 3  In 1923 in the  ﬁ rst edition of  Die 
Nordische Seele Clauss described the phenomenological method as in essentials a turning 
toward the soul ( Umwendung zur Seele ) and invited those who wanted to know more 
about phenomenology to read Husserl’s  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und 
phänomenologischen Philosophie . 4  And in 1926 in the  ﬁ rst edition of  Rasse und Seele 
 R.  Bernasconi (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Penn State University ,  University Park ,  PA ,  USA 
e-mail:  rlb43@psu.edu 
 Chapter 4 
 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization 
 Robert  Bernasconi   
 1  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Die nordische Seele. Rettung, Prägung, Ausdruck (Halle: Max 
Niemeyer, 1923);  Rasse und Seele ( Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1926); and  Von Seele und Antlitz der 
Rassen und Völker (Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1929). The  ﬁ rst two titles went through numerous 
editions and sold many thousands of copies. Sometimes the revisions were so thorough that one 
wonders they were not published under different titles. This was in fact the case with  Von Seele und 
Antlitz der Rassen und Völker which was, Clauss tells us, begun as a revision of  Rasse und Seele , 
x. I have consulted the 1923, 1932, 1933, 1934, and 1939 editions of  Die Nordische Seele and the 
1926, 1933, 1936, 1938 (?), 1939 and 1943 editions of  Rasse und Seele . 
 2  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 27. 
 3  Karl Schuhmann,  Husserl-Chronik (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977), 217 and 237. 
 4  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1923), 9 and note. 
56
R. Bernasconi
Clauss included the following remarks in the foreword: “In terms of my research my 
deepest gratitude belongs to Professor Edmund Husserl in Freiburg; I learned from him 
in former times the methodology for my research and in addition much valuable 
explanation ( Aufschluss ), for example, concerning the relation of the soul to the body.” 5 
Clauss reprinted these sentences in the foreword to  Von Seele und Antlitz der Rassen 
und Völker in 1929. 6 A review in 1927 of  Rasse und Seele by Karl Löwith recognized 
Clauss’s phenomenological credentials suf ﬁ ciently to support the contention that his 
was a phenomenological approach to race. 7 And one of Clauss’s contemporaries 
referred to Clauss’s writings speci ﬁ cally as a “phenomenology of races,” referencing 
the fact that he was a student of “Eduard (sic) Husserl.” 8  
 In the 1930s Clauss became heavily involved with the Nazis, but as late as 1933 
Eric Voegelin paid him the singular compliment of describing him as the only person 
to have raised race theory “to a level in which no one need be ashamed to operate.” 9 
However, by that time Clauss had already dropped all reference to phenomenology, 
probably because Husserl as a Jew was considered suspect, although he did about 
that time introduce the thought that his racial science was “presuppositionless,” 
which could be understood as a discreet reference to phenomenology. 10 In any event, 
it is no surprise that phenomenologists forgot Clauss as he forgot them. 11 Today he 
is remembered only by a few historians. 12 Herbert Spiegelberg devoted just one 
 5  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), vi. 
 6  Clauss,  Von Seele und Antlitz der Rassen und Völker ,xii. 
 7  Karl Löwith, “Rezension: Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rasse und Seele ,” Zeitschrift für Menschenkunde, 
Blätter für Charakterologie und angewandte Psychologie 2 (1926–1927): 18–26. Reprinted in 
Löwith’s  Mensch und Menschenwelt. Sämtliche Schriften  (Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1981), 198–208.  
 8  Wilhelm Schmidt,  Rasse und Volk (Salzburg-Leipzig: Anton Pustet, 1935), 51–52. 
 9  Eric Voegelin,  Rasse und Staat (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1933), 12;  Race and State , trans. Ruth 
Hein (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1997), 12. 
 10  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (Berlin: Buechergilde Gutenberg, 1933), 180, this is, 
in fact probably a 1938 revision. The comment is found in some additions which were added to the 
1933 edition some time after 1933 but without the copyright date being changed. The fact that this 
is the 13th edition suggests that the edition I consulted dates from 1938 or early 1939. 
 11  However, in his main book published after the war, Clauss did refer to Max Scheler’s book on 
sympathy. Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Die Seele des Andern. Wege zum Verstehen in Abend- und 
Morgenland (Baden-Baden: Bruno. 1958). Clauss understood that the problem of understanding was 
particularly acute in the case of an alien people (ibid., 228). He also understood that mere observation, 
which was the route adopted by Western science, but not only it, was inadequate for understanding 
(ibid., 233). It is in this context that he recalled Scheler’s distinctions between  Nachfühlen and pity 
( Mitleid ), but looked beyond it toward what Clauss called  Mitschwinger , a co-vibrating (ibid., 240). 
Quoting Max Scheler,  Wesen und Formen der Sympathie , Gesammelte Werke 7 (Bern: Francke), 19; 
 The Nature of Sympathy , trans. Peter Heath (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970), 8.  
 12  The most extensive recent exploration of Clauss’s ideas including his relation to Husserl can be 
found in Richard T. Gray’s  About Face. German Physiognomic Thought from Lavater to Auschwitz 
(Detroit: Wayne State University, 2004), 273–332. Other recent discussions of Clauss include 
Édouard Conte and Cornelia Essner,  La quête de la race (Paris: Hachette, 1995), 76–79 and 
Christopher M. Hutton,  Race and the Third Reich (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2005), 56–60. An 
older study that contains personal reminiscences of Clauss is Reinhard Walz, “Ludwig Ferdinand 
Clauss zum 70. Geburtstag. Die Entstehung einer Psychologie der Psyche,”  Jahrbuch für 
Psychologie, Psychotherapie und Medizinische Anthropologie 9 (1962): 149–65. 
57
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
sentence to Clauss in his monumental history of the phenomenological movement 
where he is described as having been for some time an unof ﬁ cial assistant to Edmund 
Husserl who later became interested in questions of racial psychology. 13 Spiegelberg 
also wrote that Clauss did not join the Nazis, but this is contradicted by Peter 
Weingart, who records that Clauss joined the party in 1933 with the membership 
number 2,909,460. 14 Some aspects of Clauss’s relation to Husserl are unclear. It is 
sometimes said that Clauss wanted his manuscript  Die Nordische Seele to be his 
 Habilitation thesis and that Husserl rejected it because it included anti-Semitic 
remarks. If the story is true, it is surprising that the copy Clauss sent to Husserl 
contained the dedication “Seinem hochverehrten Lehrer Prof. Dr. Edmund Husserl 
als kleines Zeichen seiner grossen Dankbarkeit überreicht vom Verfasser.” 15 It would 
also make it rather surprising that relations between the two men were suf ﬁ ciently 
cordial that Clauss visited Husserl in St. Märgen in July 1931 and that Clauss was 
among only 12 authors selected to contribute to Husserl’s  Festschrift in 1929. 16 It is 
possible that the story had its origins in Clauss’s defense when he and his work were 
being investigated by Walter Gross, Director of the Race Policy Department of the 
Nazi Party. 17 
 Clauss’s approach to race appears to have been guided by Husserl’s insistence in 
the second—and at the time unpublished—book of the  Ideen that the human being 
is not the uni ﬁ cation of two realities but constitutes a comprehensive unity. 18 This 
means that body and soul are not realities externally linked, but are “most intimately 
 13  Herbert Spiegelberg,  The Phenomenological Movement. An Historical Introduction , third edition 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982), 249. 
 14  Peter Weingart,  Doppel-Leben. Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss: Zwischen Rassenforschung und 
Widerstand (Frankfurt: Campus, 1995), 36. 
 15  It was signed and dated 20 December 1923. Clauss also sent Husserl copies of the  ﬁ rst editions 
of  Rasse und Seele (1926) and  Fremde Schönheit (1927). I am grateful to Dr. Thomas Vongehr of 
the Husserl Archives for this information. There is also no indication of a falling out between the 
two men when Husserl refers to Clauss’s work in Germanistics in his letter to Roman Ingarden of 
30 December 1920. See Edmund Husserl,  Briefwechsel , vol. 3, ed. Karl Schuhmann (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1994), 208. 
 16  L.F. Clauss, “Das Verstehen des sprachlichen Kunstwerks”  Edmund Husserl zum 70. Geburtstag 
gewidmet, Ergänzungsband zum Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung 
(Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1929), 56n. The other authors were Hermann Ammann, Oskar Becker, 
Martin Heidegger, Gerhart Husserl, Roman Ingarden, Fritz Kaufmann, Alexandre Koyré, Hans 
Lipps, Friedrich Neumann, Edith Stein and Hedwig Conrad-Martius. For his contribution Clauss 
reverted to his earlier interest in philology with an essay entitled “Das Verstehen des sprachlichen 
Kunstwerks. Ein Streifzug durch Grundfragen der verstehenden Wissenschaften.” In it Clauss 
made a brief passing reference to the phenomenological notion of originally given experiences 
( Erlebnisse ). He also included an endnote relating philology as research on expression to the 
discussion of comparative research on expression as found in the section on “die mimetische 
Methode” in Clauss’s heavily illustrated study of racial types from the same year,  Von Seele und Antlitz 
der Rassen und Völker . For Clauss’s visit to Husserl, see Schuhmann,  Husserl-Chronik , 383. 
 17  See Weingart,  Doppel-Leben , 133. 
 18  Edmund Husserl.  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Zweites Buch , Husserliana 4 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952), 240;  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. Second Book , trans. Richard Rojcewicz 
and André Schuwer (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989), 251. 
58
R. Bernasconi
interwoven and in a certain way mutually penetrating,” albeit the psychic has a 
priority. 19 Husserl rejected the idea that I am my body, arguing instead that I have a 
body. 20 He wrote: “The Body is not only in general a thing, but is indeed expression 
of the spirit and  is at once the organ of the spirit .” 21  Clauss made a similar claim: “I am 
not this body, rather I possess it; it is my  ﬁ eld of expression.” 22 
 Husserl described how his account of the “soulful body” accorded with one’s 
apprehension ( Auffassung ) of a human being, which is neither aimed at the body, nor at a 
spirit joined or fastened to the body. It is aimed at the human being. 23 This emerges in 
a certain way of walking, a certain way of dancing, and a certain way of speaking, and 
is true of every human performance as a psycho-physical unity. 24  Husserl appealed to 
the notion of style in his account of the comprehensive unity of spirit and body by drawing 
a parallel between that relation and the reading of a book where I live in the sense. 25  
 Clauss adapted Husserl’s account of the apprehension of the human being to the 
apprehension of the human being as racialized by developing Husserl’s brief mention 
of style as well as his discussion of expression in the second book of the  Ideen in the 
section “Soul and Body. Expression” in the  ﬁ rst edition of  Rasse und Seele , Clauss 
described the body as “something for the soul ( Etwas-für-Seele ).” The soul cannot 
be perceived by our  ﬁ ve senses but “the body ( der Leib ) belongs to the soul as the 
scene or setting ( Schauplatz ) of its expression.” 26 Instead, “we grasp the style in the 
lived experience of the soul of the other only through the style of its expression.” 27 
Style rules the characteristics of the soul—its talents, its experiences—and the 
body—its arena or theatre—in which these experiences express themselves. 28 
Nordics, Negroes, and Mongols all have different styles. To investigate these differences 
Clauss proposed a new form of study which he called “style-research.” 29 
 Phenomenology’s Rejection of the Biologization of Race 
 Most biologists today would say there is no such thing as race. There is nothing to 
see, whereas most regular people are convinced that they can usually tell someone’s 
race at a glance. They might occasionally get it wrong because they have been misled 
 19  Husserl,  Ideen. Zweites Buch , 94; trans.  Ideas. Second Book , 110. 
 20  Husserl,  Ideen. Zweites Buch , 94; trans.  Ideas. Second Book , 110. 
 21  Husserl,  Ideen. Zweites Buch , 96; trans.  Ideas. Second Book , 102. 
 22  Clauss,  Die nordische Seele (1923), 34. 
 23  Husserl,  Ideen. Zweites Buch , 240; trans.  Ideas. Second Book , 252. Trans. modi ﬁ ed. 
 24  Husserl,  Ideen II , 321; trans.  Ideas II , 333. 
 25  Husserl,  Ideen II , 236; trans.  Ideas II , 248. 
 26  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele , (1926), 19. 
 27  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele , (1926), 19. 
 28  Clauss,  Von Seele und Antlitz der Rassen und Völker , 93–96. Bruno Petermann praised Clauss for 
his introduction of the notion of style in the context of the study of races:  Wesensfragen seelischen 
Seins (Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth, 1938), 96. 
 29  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 9 
59
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
by the context. Or they might be uncertain because levels of race mixing, sometimes 
deeply embedded in previous generations, have created zones of ambiguity. But so 
far as they are concerned, they see race. The seeing of race is governed by convention. 
When we assign someone to a race, we do so in the terms that society supplies. 
These shift from place to place and from time to time. 
 The idea that one does not see a human being in general but a racialized human 
being was at one time commonplace. In 1797 Joseph de Maistre observed that “In my 
lifetime I have seen Frenchmen, Italians, Russians, etc.; thanks to Montesquieu, 
I even know that  one can be Persian . But as for  man , I declare that I have never in 
my life met him.” 30 The same conviction was expressed in 1914 by Albrecht Wirth: 
“Everyone knows without further ado, who is a Mongol, who a Black, an Indian, or 
a White. And nobody would confuse a Chinese, even a naked one, with a Papuan.” 31 
However, Wirth quickly introduced a quali ﬁ cation on the grounds that race mixing 
had complicated the issue: “It is likewise ‘known to the court’ that one can on the 
contrary very readily confuse an individual belonging to the Mongolian race with an 
individual White person, that one can no less confuse a South Italian with a Berber, 
and even with a Creole and sometimes even with a Japanese.” 32 Hans F. K. Günther, 
an even more popular writer on race in Nazi Germany than Clauss, was well aware 
of the dif ﬁ culty of identifying a person’s race, especially in the case of people of 
mixed race: “the outward appearance ( Erscheinugsbild ) of a man (his phenotype) 
gives a certain clue, by no means to be despised, to his racial membership, but not a 
complete proof.” He explained: “men who are phenotypically the same can be 
idiotypically different and  vice versa .” 33 Legal and sometimes scienti ﬁ c de ﬁ nitions 
of race had placed genotype and phenotype in con ﬂ ict: someone who appeared to be 
of one race was decreed to belong to another. In Nazi Germany people were to 
scrutinize certain characteristics that might reveal a person’s “true” identity and if 
necessary pass the question over to experts. 
 A widespread history of race mixing combined with the idea, reinforced by 
Mendelian theories of inheritance, that one cannot altogether eradicate racial traits 
transmitted from past generations led to the suspicion of appearances. It was not only 
that someone’s appearance at any given time might be interpreted might not coin-
cide with the legal de ﬁ nition of race at that time, which happened with great 
frequency in nineteenth century United States. Racial features that were invisible in 
one generation might reappear in the next, leading to the drama frequently described 
in novels of the Harlem Renaissance. 34  The distinction between phenotype and 
 30  Joseph de Maistre,  Considérations sur la France , eds. R. de Johannet and F. Vermale (Paris: 
Vrin, 1936), 81;  Considerations on France , trans. Richard A. Lebrun (Montreal: McGill-Queens 
University Press, 1974), 97. 
 31  Albrecht Wirth,  Rasse und Volk (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1914), 37. 
 32  Idem. 
 33  Hans F. K. Günther,  Rassenkunde Europas (Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1926), 76;  The Racial 
Elements of European History , trans. G. C. Wheeler (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1927), 83. Translation 
modi ﬁ ed. 
 34  For example, Nella Larsen,  Passing (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1929) . 
60
R. Bernasconi
genotype, introduced by Wilhelm Johannsen at the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, can be used, or rather misused, to suggest that the genotype is the truth and 
phenotype merely the appearance that can be misleading about this truth. 35 But the 
phenotype does not simply refer to appearances: it includes those aspects of an 
organism that are discovered only through technical examination. The phenotype as 
such—insofar as it includes the shape of the skull, the angle of the forehead, and so 
on—is only what appears to the scientist, that is to say, to a very arti ﬁ cial form of 
sight. The phenotype is no more the starting point of the phenomenology of racial-
ization than the genotype. 
 Clauss thought that in his own time too much weight was being given to biology. 
He came to this conclusion in part from his reading of Husserl’s  Ideen insofar as he 
applied Husserl’s critique of naturalism to the racial science of his day which had 
mistakenly given to biology the  ﬁ rst and last word on race. This is perhaps where 
Clauss’s work, however problematic in its development, still has something to 
contribute. Eugen Fischer, who together with Erwin Baur and Fritz Lenz contributed 
to the seminal volume  Human Heredity , suggested that Clauss was at his best as a 
natural scientist and not in his efforts to take his starting point from Husserl. 36 But 
Fischer should have been able to see that Clauss relied on Husserl’s critique of 
naturalism in his attempt to develop an alternative to the biologizing tendencies of 
Fischer and his colleagues. Clauss himself would make this clearer later. In 1934, in 
 Rassenseelenforschung im täglichen Leben , which was one of his more political 
statements, Clauss made it clear that he wanted his use of the notion of  Rasse and 
the related term  Art to be understood in its natural sense and not its natural 
scienti ﬁ c sense. 37 
 One can see the implications of Clauss’s resistance to the biological concept of 
race and his reliance on lived experience and intuition in the phenomenological 
sense by observing his critique of Fritz Lenz. In a footnote in the  ﬁ rst edition of 
 Rasse und Seele Clauss cited as an illustration of the illegitimacy of Lenz’s inferences 
in his commentary on the Negro: “The Negro also seems to have a very limited 
sympathy ( Mitgefühl ) with animals. Their actions often appear cruel, but this obviously 
arises less from a conscious than from a naïve cruelty, that arises from a lack of 
sympathy.” 38 Clauss’s comment was that in the case of something as foreign as this, 
 35  For the proper usage of these terms, see Wilhelm Johannsen, “The Genotype Conception of 
Heredity,”  The American Naturalist 45, March (1911): 129–59. 
 36  Eugen Fischer, “Review of L. F. Clauss,  Rasse und Seele ,”  Zeitschrift für Morphologie und 
Anthropologie , 26/1 (1926): 187. 
 37  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rassenseelenforschung (Erfurt: Kurt Stenger, 1934), 14. 
 38  Fritz Lenz, “Die Erblichkeit der geistingen Begabung”  Menschliche Erblichkeitslehre (Munich: 
J. F. Lehmann, 1923), 413; “The Inheritance of Intellectual Gifts,”  Human Heredity , trans. Eden 
and Cedar Paul (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1931), 633–34. (The translation is from the 
heavily modi ﬁ ed 1927 edition, but there are no signi ﬁ cant differences introduced in the passages 
cited.) In fact Lenz’s next sentence is more objectionable than the one Clauss highlights: “the 
notorious lack of sexual control among Negroes” is attributed by Lenz not to a strong sexual impulse 
but a childish lack of inhibition. Clauss’s critique seems to re ﬂ ect his reading of Supplement XIV 
of the second book of Husserl’s  Ideen. 
61
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
there is no possibility of gaining access to the inward side of alien lived experience. 39 
In another example of Clauss’s rejection of the racial science of his contemporaries, 
he dismissed the amassing of data in an effort to prove statistically that one race is 
more gifted than another. In response to Lenz’s claim that “in respect of mental gifts 
the Nordic race marches in the van of mankind,” 40 he conceded that races should be 
judged as gifted according to their capacity for culture, but he insisted that it was a 
mistake to think of culture in the singular. There is more than one culture and no 
race can lay claim to culture as such. “That the Nordic race is gifted in relating to its 
own cultures is as obvious as the truth that everybody speaks their own language 
best.” 41 In these ways, Clauss’s phenomenological approach led him to separate his 
views from those of the majority of his contemporaries in racial science. 
 Clauss considered the biological approach to race to be somewhat primitive and 
he likened what the biologist saw of race to someone who looks at a painting and sees 
only colors: red, green, yellow, and so on. 42 Race was not for Clauss a collection of 
traits or properties arti ﬁ cially isolated in the manner of physical anthropology. 
When one sees someone in the normal course of things, one does not isolate skin 
color, facial features, body shape, or hair texture. One sees the living person such 
that race pervades the whole essence of a living creature and different races constitute 
different forms of human existence. 43 
 He was helped here by Husserl’s distinction in  Ideen II between the personalistic 
attitude and the naturalistic attitude. We live in the personalistic attitude and 
adopt the naturalistic attitude only when pursuing theoretical and thus arti ﬁ cial 
interests. “In the natural life of the Ego we do not always—indeed not even 
predominately—consider the world in a naturalistic way, as if we were doing 
physics and zoology, … To live as a person is to posit oneself as a person, to  ﬁ nd 
oneself in, and to bring oneself into, conscious relations with a surrounding 
world ( Umwelt ).” 44 It is race, not as the scientist sees it, but as it infuses one’s 
attitude to the world that is Clauss’s object of inquiry. 
 Increasingly Clauss became drawn, like many of those working under Husserl’s 
in ﬂ uence, to the notion of  Gestalt in his effort to theorize this sense of the whole 
person. For Clauss, race was “a style of lived experiencing which permeates the 
entirety ( Ganzheit ) of a living con ﬁ guration ( Gestalt ).” 45 Indeed in 1937 Clauss 
published a pamphlet under the title  Rasse ist Gestalt which in its reliance on the 
 39  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 28n. 
 40  Fritz Lenz, “Die Erblichkeit der geistigen Begaburg,” 419; trans. “The Inheritance of Intellectual 
Gifts,” 655. 
 41  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Von Seele und Antlitz der Rassen und Völker , 96. 
 42  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rasse ist Gestalt (Munich: Franz Eher, 1937), 9. It should be noted 
that it is the third pamphlet in the series  Schriften der Bewegung and the cover bears the insignia 
of an eagle carrying a swastika, 
 43  Clauss,  Rasse ist Gestalt , x. 
 44  Husserl.  Ideen II , 183; trans.  Ideas II , 192–93. 
 45  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1932), 17. 
62
R. Bernasconi
notion of expression exhibited the continuing impact of Husserl’s  Ideen on his 
account. Body and soul are only separable conceptually. As different sides of the 
same, they together both constitute a single being ( Wesen ). The soul itself is not visible. 
It cannot be heard, but it appears in or through the body as expression ( Ausdruck ). 46 
They are in harmony most of the time, although Clauss recognized that this is not 
always the case and that it is in the disturbance or anomaly ( Störung ) that arises 
when they are not in harmony, as when someone is of mixed race, that race as a 
 Gestalt becomes visible as such. 47 
 The Question of Race in Clauss 
 At his best Clauss recognized that it is not the task of phenomenology to identify 
races as style-types. The different classes he discussed were taken from anthropological 
studies and, contrary to what he said about his own research being presuppositionless, 
presupposed by his own investigations. 48 The question which truly preoccupied 
Clauss from start to  ﬁ nish was not classi ﬁ cation or identi ﬁ cation, as it was for many 
physical anthropologists at that time, but understanding, and in particular under-
standing across difference. It was this which led him to theorize race as a source of 
misunderstanding. One can  ﬁ nd, particularly in  Rasse und Seele , extensive discussions 
of some of the races he recognized, but Clauss’s initial focus was on understanding, 
or, more accurately, the misunderstandings that arise between races. For him this 
was true not only across the four or  ﬁ ve main races, but also among the different 
races that constituted the Germanic people and indeed within the same family.  Die 
Nordische Seele  began, under the chapter heading “Understanding and Not-
Understanding,” with an account of a brother and sister in the Schwarzwald who not 
only looked different, but had different personalities and who would often 
misunderstand each other. 49  Clauss’s explanation was that there was no such thing 
as human experience as such and that members of different races experienced the 
world differently. 50 It was in misunderstanding that one allegedly saw the impact of 
race on daily life. 
 Once one has recognized that Clauss’s focus was less on identifying race for the 
purpose of classi ﬁ cation, whether either for pseudo-scienti ﬁ c or legal reasons, than on 
understanding those unlike ourselves to the extent that that is possible, the strengths 
and weaknesses of Clauss’s position fall into perspective. He acknowledged that 
 46  Clauss,  Rasse ist Gestalt , 9. 
 47  Clauss,  Rasse ist Gestalt , 11. 
 48  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1939), 43 and 60. 
 49  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1923), 1–2. These paragraphs were repeated with only minor 
modi ﬁ cations in the subsequent editions consulted. 
 50  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1933), 38. 
63
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
 phenomenology might at  ﬁ rst seem inappropriate for the task of avoiding  projecting 
one’s own values onto other cultures because it proceeds by self-examination 
( Selbsterforschung ) in the sense that it draws on the phenomena of one’s own 
consciousness. 51 Husserl’s approach to race was expansive, so that one moves 
beyond race to “encounter all European and then all cultures in general, the whole 
world, all animality, and all humanity, and  ﬁ nally also our science, as a cultural 
formation of European culture, German culture.” 52 Husserl recounted how explorers 
and anthropologists also move intuitively and indeed also expansively from the 
familiar to the unfamiliar, but Clauss, who actually engaged in extensive 
anthropological  ﬁ eld work among the Bedouins, insisted on the dif ﬁ culty of 
bridging differences. 53 He developed what he called the “mimetic method” in which 
he tried to adopt the style of those he sought to understand better. 54 Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty expressed a parallel insight to that underlying Clauss’s method when 
he wrote in a manner faithful to Husserl: “I do not understand the gestures of others 
by some act of intellectual interpretation.” 55 In this context he wrote about a “gestural 
meaning” such that “The meaning of a gesture thus understood is not behind it, it is 
intermingled with the structure of the world outlined by the gesture, and which 
I take up on my own account.” 56 
 However, Clauss did not always remain faithful to his phenomenological origins. 
Taking his starting point in Husserl’s insight that to live as a person is to bring oneself 
into conscious relation to the  Umwelt . Clauss wrote, “The landscape forms the soul, 
but the soul also forms the landscape.” 57 Indeed, they form an essential unity. 58 
However, his error was to import the idea of racial purity and interpret it as a unity 
of style. 59 The consequence was that race mixing, not at  ﬁ rst perhaps, but after 
successive generations, was understood by him to disturb the unity of a style. 60 
And this in turn, following a widespread prejudice against race mixing, was supposed 
to lead to psychological disturbance: “The style of the expression is inhibited, if the 
 51  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele , (1926), 27–28. 
 52  Husserl,  Ideen II , 183; trans.  Ideas II , 192–93. 
 53  Clauss’s approach is particularly in evidence in his work on the people of the Middle East, which 
saw fruit in  Als Beduine unter Beduinen (Freiburg: Herder, 1933). It was republished in a revised 
form as  Semiten der Wüste unter sich. Miterlebnisse eines Rassenforschers (Berlin: Buechergilde 
Gutenberg, 1937), but reappeared, further revised, after the Second World War under the old title. 
See also the remarkable pamphlet made up of letters to his son:  Araber (Berlin: Luken and Luken, 
1943). 
 54  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Rasse und Charakter (Freiburg: Diesterweg, 1942), 103–13. 
 55  Merleau-Ponty,  Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1946), 216; trans. 
 Phenomenology of Perception (London: Routledge, 1962), 186. 
 56  Merleau-Ponty,  Phénoménologie de la perception , 216–17; trans.  Phenomenology of Perception , 
187. 
 57  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (Munich: F. F. Lehmann, 1939), 25. 
 58  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 33. 
 59  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 24. 
 60  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1939), 30. 
64
R. Bernasconi
style of its body does not purely correspond to it.” 61 It can even lead to a person 
whose soul and body are out of alignment: “We often  ﬁ nd in black hair and thin 
stature at the same time a blonde and slim soul, that is, a soul to which—if we may 
put it so, belongs according to its style a blonde and slim body.” 62 Clauss had already 
in 1926 considered a case where the soul occupies a body that does not correspond 
to its style. 63 In such cases we must talk of a broken expression rather than a pure 
expression. 64 In this context Clauss even raised the possibility of a two-souled man. 65 
 If this was not bad enough, Clauss drew social policy implications from his 
perspective that undid any good that might have arisen from the insight that each race 
has its own style that cannot be located on a hierarchy. It set Germans against aliens. 
The argument was as follows “The world of the Germans is created in the Nordic 
attitude and is on that account formed in the Nordic style. Every alien lineage thereby 
disturbs our world formation. We can take note of the alien and praise it as something 
else. Because god created it, it is as good as we are. But it can never become us: it is 
alien and should remain alien.” 66  The language of “the alien,” who must kept at a 
distance, all too easily could be used to justify measures against them. In this way 
Clauss translated a dominant trend within Nazi ideology into his phenomenological 
language, as he also did when he adopted the language of “pure blood,” although he 
insisted that he meant the pure unity of the soul with its body. 67  
 The error from the phenomenological point of view lay in the way Clauss had 
increasingly come to substantialize the various style types he had identi ﬁ ed. 
The body receives its meaning from the soul. The soul-body total content 
( Gesamtgehalt ) which in this sense is “whole” and pure in its style served for him 
as representative of a single type. 68 The error was brilliantly exposed by Merleau-
Ponty when, in an objection addressed originally against existential psychoanalysis, 
he warned against possible misunderstandings that might arise from the claim that 
corporeal and psychic life are involved in a relationship of reciprocal expression 
or the claim that the bodily event always has a psychic meaning. The body is not 
the transparent envelope of the mind. “The return to existence, as to the setting 
in which the communication between body and mind can be understood, is not a 
return to Consciousness or Spirit.” 69 Nor is it a return to the soul, which seemed to 
become increasingly rei ﬁ ed under Clauss’s gaze as his thought lost contact with 
its phenomenological origins. 
 61  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 21. 
 62  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1933), 9. 
 63  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1926), 22. 
 64  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele  (1926), 22. 
 65  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele  (1926), 23. 
 66  Clauss,  Rasse ist Gestalt , 28. 
 67  Clauss,  Die Nordische Seele (1923), 121. 
 68  Clauss,  Rasse und Seele (1933), 28. 
 69  Maurice Merleau-Ponty,  Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1946), 187; 
 Phenomenology of Perception , trans. Colin Smith (London: Routledge, 1962), 161. 
65
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
 The Phenomenological Concept of Race After Clauss 
 What do we see when we see race? Ralph Ellison shows how one can see someone’s 
race in such a way that they become invisible: “When they approach me they see 
only my surroundings, themselves, or  ﬁ gments of their imagination—indeed, 
everything and anything except me.” 70 As he explains, the invisibility occurs 
“because of a peculiar disposition of the eyes of those with whom I come in contact.” 
To ask what we see when we see race is also to direct attention to the fact that there 
is a way of seeing race that stops us from seeing the whole human being. But is it 
always an obstacle? Is it wrong to racialize? 
 For many people the question of what they see when they see race is an 
 uncomfortable question. We are all aware of the trouble that we can  ﬁ nd ourselves in 
if we do not say what we are supposed to say. Even now Reverend Jesse Jackson is 
not allowed to forget that in 1994 he said that he felt fear when while walking late at 
night in Washington, DC, he heard footsteps behind him, but was relieved when he 
discovered it was a White man and not a Black man. Fear, followed by relief, quickly 
followed by shame. 71  Even this account of how he immediately corrected his  ﬁ rst 
response is held against him. The anecdote records the difference between what we 
feel and what we believe that we are supposed to feel, between our  ﬁ rst response and 
our re ﬂ ective response to that  ﬁ rst response. This re ﬂ ects the distinction between the 
immediate affective response to a situation which is felt in our bodies and the secondary 
judgments that we pass on someone when we determine their race by taking note of 
their features and the tertiary judgments we pass on ourselves for doing so. 
 The nervousness that usually surrounds the question of what one sees when one 
sees race perhaps helps to explain why phenomenologists, who have the tools to 
address the question, have chosen with a few notable exceptions to ignore it in favor 
of the question of what it feels like to be the target or object of racism in the tradition 
of Frantz Fanon’s famous 1951 essay “L’expérience vécue du Noir.” 72 Such studies 
show how the experience of the racist gaze can serve to create strong bonds between 
people targeted in this way. But how does one see race? One phenomenologist who 
did address this question was Jean-Paul Sartre who, with some hesitation, talked not 
of a Jewish race, but of “Jewish  races ” in  Re ﬂ exions sur la question juive on the 
basis of “certain inherited physical conformations that one encounters more frequently 
among Jews than among non-Jews.” 73 In a phrase which brings to mind Clauss’s 
 70  Ralph Ellison,  Invisible Man (New York: Vintage Books, 1989), 3. 
 71  Lynn Duke, “Confronting Violence: African American Conferees Look Inward,”  Washington 
Post , January 8, 1996. 
 72  Frantz Fanon, “L’expérience vécue du Noir,”  Esprit 19/179 (May, 1951): 657–79; “The Lived 
Experience of the Black,”  Race , trans. Valentine Moulard, ed. Robert Bernasconi (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2001), 184–201. The essay was reprinted the following year in  Black Skin, White 
Masks :  Peau noire, masques blancs (Paris: Seuil, 1952), 113–41. 
 73  Jean-Paul Sartre,  Ré ﬂ exions sur la question juive (Paris: Morihien, 1946), 73;  Anti-Semite and 
Jew , trans. George J. Becker (New York: Schocken Books, 1976), 60–61. 
66
R. Bernasconi
adoption of the term  Gestalt , Sartre explained that what enables one to identify 
someone as a Jew is an “inseparable ensemble in which the psychical and the physical, 
the social, the religious, and the individual are closely mingled.” 74  It is a living 
synthesis which cannot be “transmitted by heredity and which, at bottom, is identical 
with his complete personality.” 75 The Jew is not therefore determined by his or her 
race, at least as that is normally understood. “We must therefore envisage the hereditary 
and somatic characteristics of the Jew as one factor among others in his situation, 
not as a condition determining his nature.” 76 
 More recently, Linda Martin Alcoff in two major essays in  Visible Identities 
focused on how our perceptions of race are sedimented contextual knowledges carried 
in the body. 77 Today most of us live in societies where identifying another’s race 
is—compared with the experiences of previous generations—relatively unimportant 
and we can readily live with a certain amount of ambiguity about someone’s race. 
We can say with Alcoff: “If race is a structure of contemporary perception, then it…
is the  ﬁ eld rather than that which stands out.” 78 But it is not always the case that race 
does not stand out and in some societies it has been especially prominent. In Germany 
under the Nazis there was an obsession with race and people were trained to see it 
more precisely. In the United States there is still such a high degree of segregation 
that someone’s race can readily stand out. For example, someone’s race can be striking 
if they enter a room where everyone is assigned to another race. In such cases race 
tends to be abstracted from their other characteristics and they are not seen in their 
unity as a living human being. And if one is used to being in contexts were the races 
come together but is suddenly faced with racial homogeneity, one sees the lack of 
diversity. On occasion one even racializes people over the telephone or listening to 
the radio on the basis of the sound of their voice. 
 We see race because from childhood our friends, neighbors, the government, and 
the social media insist that it is pertinent. Growing up we are trained not just to see 
race but to see races in speci ﬁ c ways, and if we move from one country to another 
as an adult we are retrained. Not just what we see and how we see it but the mean-
ings attached to it are culturally formed. In different times and spaces different races 
are labeled differently. There is both a question of possibility—the categories that 
are available—and the criteria of relevance: the difference that it makes. The ques-
tion of how we racialize cannot be separated from why we do so and whether that 
motivation calls for decision in ambiguous cases. The seeing of race for more than 
a century was dominated by anxiety about mistaking someone’s true race, particu-
larly in contexts where someone of mixed race was assigned by science or by the 
law as belonging to one of the races in the mix, for the purpose of enforcing segre-
gation laws, including anti-miscegenation laws. 
 74  Sartre,  Ré ﬂ exions sur la question juive , 82; trans.  Anti-Semite and Jew , 64. 
 75  Sartre,  Ré ﬂ exions sur la question juive , 82; trans.  Anti-Semite and Jew , 64. 
 76  Sartre,  Ré ﬂ exions sur la question juive , 82; trans.  Anti-Semite and Jew , 64. 
 77  Linda Martin Alcoff,  Visible Identities (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 184–85. 
 78  Ibid., 188. 
67
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
 Today a Hutu can recognize a Tutsi at a glance and vice versa even in State 
College, Pennsylvania, because there was a time in Rwanda when their lives 
depended on being able to do so. An Israeli Jew can differentiate in a hotel lobby the 
Lebanese, Syrians, and Palestinians with an ease that surprises visitors. A White 
person from the North American suburbs who rarely visits downtown can, when 
they eventually do so, be overwhelmed by the sight of African Americans downtown 
and seem unable to see anything else. By contrast, Korean Americans, Chinese 
Americans, and Vietnamese Americans are shocked that some Anglo Americans 
cannot always distinguish them and, not surprisingly, they see this incapacity as a 
sign of their indifference. This is a form of racial blindness that is understood as 
insensitivity by those seen and not as social progress. 
 The creation of racial divisions and the insistence that rigorous maintenance of 
these divisions is vital to the health and even survival of societies has shaped modern 
history. Given that these divisions have long structured global society, they are not 
easily dismantled. They have been given a social and economic reality that cannot 
be dissolved simply because biologists no longer have a use for the concept of race. 
But the problem is that the process of typi ﬁ cation carries the danger that, when one 
sees race as one walks down the street, one looks past the individual and sees only 
the caricature that the media feeds us about a type. 
 Toward a Phenomenology of Racialization 
 Certain features of the racialization process come into clarity on the basis of a 
 phenomenological approach. First and foremost, what one sees is in large measure 
a function of the categories available to us. What one sees are the categories one is 
taught to use. There is sometimes a tendency to underemphasize the degree to which 
the terms that are employed to classify the races shifts. Since 1950, under the 
in ﬂ uence of Ashley Montagu and other members of the second generation of the 
Boasian school, there has been a tendency to restrict race to the four or  ﬁ ve main 
races, but throughout most of the last 200 years specialists listed many more races, 
not just within Europe, but also throughout the colonies and in the United States 
where administrators were eager to divide people along racial lines. 79 Because of the 
history of chattel slavery, colonialism, segregation, and genocide, what people see 
 79  The UNESCO Statement on Race of 1950 that was produced under the chairmanship of Ashley 
Montagu identi ﬁ ed three major divisions of mankind: the Mongloid, Negroid, and Caucasoid. For 
the text and Montagu’s own commentary on it, see his  Statement on Race (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1972), 72–75. In his commentary on the following paragraph Montagu listed 
some 36 “ethnic groups” (ibid., 76–80). They would have been considered “races” by many earlier 
authorities and these could easily have been further multiplied. In the United States the division (or 
rather multiplication) was largely for immigration purposes. See Report of the Immigration 
Commission,  Dictionary of Races or Peoples (Washington: Government Printing Of ﬁ ce, 1911). 
68
R. Bernasconi
when they see race tends to be overdetermined, re ﬂ ecting not only immediate conditions, 
but layers of history that have been sedimented into perception. People have had to 
negotiate dramatic changes in the way the races are named and divided as they 
moved from country to country, and within the United States from state to state. 
Changes might also come as a change in the law. This has been especially true for 
people who are understood to be of mixed race, but this is a particularly problematic 
concept not least because most people are of mixed race but only a few are regarded 
as such, in part because of shifts in the view about the point—the proportion of 
mixed heritage—at which someone of mixed race becomes assigned to one racial 
identity. 
 Secondly, when we see race it is always someone’s race, and we see it along with 
many features which make a difference as to how race is seen. White men are likely 
to see Black men and Black women very differently, and a great deal would also 
depend on their apparent age and body type, as well as the age and life experiences 
of the man doing the seeing. They are not racialized in the same way. The same 
would be true of the way White men see other races. Although there are sometimes 
good reasons to isolate race, for example, in an analysis of social conditions, we tend 
not to see people simply in racial terms. There is a world of difference between seeing 
race, where identifying that person’s race is precisely at issue—as in the case of a 
census taker, a victim of a crime being asked to describe to the police the person 
who violated them—and seeing race without thinking about it, because in the 
encounter with a person under those terms—as a bartender, a bank teller, a shop 
assistant or just a passerby—it usually does not seem important. We may not have 
re ﬂ ected on the race, sex, or other bodily characteristics of the person to whom 
we gave our order at the restaurant, but it might nevertheless come to mind when we 
start looking for them to ask why our food has not arrived. For the phenomenologist 
it is because we can see race without noticing it that we can notice it: but what 
we see in each case is not the same thing. 
 Thirdly, to see someone as raced is not primarily about seeing them in this way 
or in that way but about ways of sharing space with them. Someone’s race can determine 
how we behave toward them. The same is true of someone’s gender. Race and sex 
tend to be very prominent in this respect, but are almost always impacted also by 
body type, age, accent, dress, and class. All these features impact how each of the 
others is perceived. In the language of Schutzian phenomenology, “typi ﬁ cations are 
not in themselves secluded, isolated schemata of meaning but are rather bound to 
and build upon one another.” 80 How these determinations impact the way in which 
we behave toward others says a great deal about one’s personal history, one’s back-
ground and the society from which one comes, More precisely, it gives us an insight 
into who we are, which must take into account how we ourselves are seen and how 
people behave toward us 
 80  See Alfred Schutz and Thomas Luckmann,  The Structures of the Life-World , trans. Richard M. 
Zaner and H. Tristram Engelhardt (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973), 81. 
69
4 Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss and Racialization
 Fourthly, to see someone’s race is to relate to them at an affective level. This aspect 
has recently been subjected to scienti ﬁ c scrutiny. Susan Fiske, a Professor of 
Psychology at Princeton University, described an experiment she and others have 
conducted in their laboratories using a functional magnetic resonance imaging scanner 
to observe brain activity when research participants are shown photographs. 
When White men are brie ﬂ y shown photographs of the face of a Black man, the 
area of the brain known as the amygdala is stimulated. It is the area that, we are told, 
“lights up when we encounter people or events we judge threatening.” 81 The amygdalae 
of White subjects are not stimulated when shown the photo of a famous black face or 
when exposed to the same face more frequently. And the same is true if White 
subjects are given two seconds to look at a photo when asked if a gray dot has been 
superimposed on the photograph or whether the person shown in the photo would 
like a certain vegetable. However, in the same experiment, if the question they had to 
decide was whether the Black face shown belonged to a person over 21, then the 
area of the brain associated with fear was activated. 82 Further experiments designed 
to show that Whites are not hard-wired to fear Black men were also conducted, but, 
strangely enough, the investigators do not appear to have asked why anybody should 
be frightened by a photograph when seen under laboratory conditions. 
 That racism can be located in the body as an affective response should be 
 understood as the sedimentation not just of one’s personal history but of the history 
to which one belongs and to which one is introduced through socialization. This accounts 
for how a certain racism can be located in one’s body—for example, in the form of 
fear and disgust—over and beyond anything that reference to one’s personal history 
can readily explain. One thinks, for example, of the naturalist Louis Agassiz who in 
1846 on his arrival in Philadelphia from Europe, was so repulsed by the  ﬁ rst Black 
men he saw up close that he did not want to eat the food they served him. 83 Just a 
few years later W. W. Wright was trying to convince his White audience that disgust 
at the thought of interracial sex was natural and it seems that that affect still survives 
among those people repelled at the sight of mixed race couples. But one should also 
not forget the exoticizing racism which seems to lead some people to seek out alien 
beauty of the kind that fascinated Clauss himself. 84 In fact, a more detailed study of 
Clauss would help considerably in understanding various aspects of German racism 
in the  ﬁ rst half of the twentieth century because he is such a good observer of people’s 
attitudes and in the course of promoting  Rassenseelenkunde he tries to represent 
them faithfully as part of his case. 
 To see the whole human being is not to see someone divorced or abstracted from 
their context, like de Maistre’s “man,” but rather in their interactions with others, 
 81  Susan T. Fiske, “Are We Born Racist?”  Are We Born Racist? , eds. Jason Marsh, Rodolfo 
Mendoza-Denton, and Jeremy Adam-Smith (Boston: Beacon Press, 2010), 9. 
 82  Fiske, “Are We Born Racist?” 12–13. 
 83  See Louis Menand,  The Metaphysical Club (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001), 105. 
 84  Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss,  Fremde Schönheit  (Heidelberg: Kampmann, 1928). According to the 
Preface, Clauss intended the book as a complement to the German emphasis on German beauty (5). 
70
R. Bernasconi
especially those who help to de ﬁ ne them. To be sure, some people consider their 
race important to them, but not everyone does. For that reason it makes no sense 
to take race out of the equation, any more than one could exclude, as one gets to 
know someone, their religion, their loves, their hopes, and the personal tragedies 
that mark them. 
 Implications for the Fight Against Racism 
 The focus in  ﬁ ghting racism has tended to fall on the judgments that are expressed 
about a race and the epithets often employed in the process. This has led to an 
emphasis on policing speech and correcting false ideas drawn from an outdated 
biology. However, the generation of phenomenologists who  ﬂ ourished in the immediate 
aftermath of the Second World War and who lived through the struggle against 
colonialism focused on systemic racism, the racism that resides globally within 
institutions including the distribution of economic goods and the obstacles that 
stand in the way of people breaking out of the place assigned to them at birth. 85 It is 
a society’s level of success or failure at addressing those issues that tells us most 
about its values, and all its members are implicated in one way or another in this 
success or failure. 
 It is frequently said that individual acts of racism of the old-fashioned kind, 
involving racial epithets and clear cases of discrimination and hatred, are on the 
decline and that the new challenge is to direct people to less dramatic questions of 
racial inequalities that are sustained by institutions. 86 This is true. But we also need 
to have a better understanding of why people are so reluctant to acknowledge these 
inequalities once they have been pointed out to them and prefer to stick with the 
stereotypes that were sedimented in the public consciousness in an earlier era. 
The reinforcement of stereotypes by the cultural media is rightly scrutinized, but the 
stereotypes are so deeply rooted in our cultural history that more will be needed 
than simply a modi ﬁ cation of the images that are employed in place of a deeper 
examination of the root causes of hurdles that face racial minorities. In short, it is 
not by changing our beliefs through a better understanding of biology that we combat 
racism effectively, but by revising our habitualities and dissolving the sedimentations 
that underlie them. But this cannot be accomplished by an act of will or of thought. 
Worse still, what is most likely necessary to transform positively the sedimentations 
in culture, language, and the affective body is a change in the structures of society 
that those very sedimentations render less likely. 
 85  See Robert Bernasconi, “Racism is a System,”  The Cambridge Companion to Existentialism , ed. 
Steven Crowell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming). 
 86  For example. Ellis Cose,  The End of Anger. A New Generation’s Take on Race and Rage (New 
York: Ecco, 2011). 
71
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_5, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 In making its  ﬁ rst appearance phenomenology must …reckon 
with a fundamental mood of skepticism . (Ideen I, 148) 
 Introduction 
 It is well known that the publication of the  ﬁ rst volume of Husserl’s  Ideen zu einer 
reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie, Erstes Buch (1913), 
provoked a wave of criticism among Husserl’s Göttingen students due to the book’s 
unambiguous commitment to transcendental idealism. Indeed, for those readers 
committed to realism, and who praised Husserl’s  Logical Investigations  ﬁ rst and 
foremost for its appeal to return to the things themselves, the announcement that 
there are no things themselves without the operations of a constituting consciousness 
or, in Husserl’s words, that “an absolute reality is just as valid as a round square” 1 
must have felt like a regrettable and utterly incomprehensible retreat. 
 Chapter 5 
 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism 
 Andrea  Staiti  
 A.  Staiti (*)
 Department of philosophy ,  Boston College ,  Chestnut Hill ,  MA ,  USA 
e-mail:  andrea.staiti@bc.edu 
 I presented earlier versions of this chapter at the meeting of the Center for Advanced Research in 
Phenomenology, Inc., in New Orleans (September 2010) and at the University of Parma, Italy 
(December 2010). I would like to thank Lester Embree, Tom Nenon, and Faustino Fabbianelli for 
the invitations and all the participants in Parma (in particular, Beatrice Centi) and New Orleans 
for their insightful comments. Nicolas De Warren, Claudio Majolino and Luca Oliva also made 
helpful remarks in private conversations. My research assistant Vincent de Vedra did a wonderful 
job copyediting the  ﬁ nal manuscript. 
 1  E. Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie (Hua 
III/1), (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), 106; Trans. F. Kersten,  Ideen Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy: First Book (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1998), 129. (Hereafter I will quote exclusively from the English translation in the 
following way:  Ideen I , page number.) 
72
A. Staiti
 Less well known is that the book was also vehemently criticized by those thinkers 
who represented the “of ﬁ cial” academic version of transcendental idealism in early 
twentieth century Germany, namely, the Neo-Kantians. Interestingly, the sharp 
criticism of Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology as presented in  Ideen is a 
point of common agreement for the two most prominent schools of Neo-Kantianism, 
Marburg and Heidelberg, which otherwise embodied two signi ﬁ cantly different 
ways of understanding and recasting Kant’s transcendental philosophy. 2 This double 
attack from opposite sides of Neo-Kantianism against  Ideen I can be considered a 
clue about the originality of Husserl’s work, which could not be aligned with other 
philosophies that were available at the time. On the other hand, it is no mystery that 
 Ideen I was written in a rush 3 and is shot through with unfortunate phrasing, which 
has given rise to all sorts of misinterpretations, especially from uncharitable readers. 
 In this chapter, I intend to present Heinrich Rickert’s (Heidelberg) and Paul 
Natorp’s (Marburg) critiques of  Ideen I and offer a response to them from a 
Husserlian point of view. I will do so by addressing two fundamental issues in 
phenomenology: the eidetic and the phenomenological notion of subjectivity. In a 
certain sense, Husserl’s formulations in  Ideen I are vulnerable to the critiques raised 
by the two leading philosophers of the Neo-Kantian movement. However, if we try 
to spell out more accurately Husserl’s position beyond the letter of the  Ideen , this 
vulnerability tends to disappear. On my account, Husserl’s concept of eidetic knowl-
edge turns out to be less in contrast with Rickert’s epistemology than the two 
thinkers would have it. The much more fundamental disagreement is on the notion 
of subjectivity and Husserl’s related claim that phenomenology is the fundamental 
science for philosophy. While the Neo-Kantians and Natorp in particular are 
skeptical about the possibility of direct descriptions of subjectivity, Husserl 
makes the concept of an eidetic science of transcendental subjectivity the hinge of 
his phenomenology. 
 The two positions, however, do not amount to just two incomparable visions. 
Neo-Kantian skepticism towards phenomenology forces the Husserlian phenome-
nologist to clarify the meaning of fundamental concepts such as essence and 
intuition and conversely, Husserlian phenomenology can help rectify some 
misunderstandings and strictures that characterize Neo-Kantian philosophy while 
nonetheless preserving its most valuable epistemological insights. The resulting 
clari ﬁ cation of Husserl’s theoretical intentions can hopefully pave the way for a 
renewed dialogue between Kantianism and phenomenology, which seems to me an 
undeniable desideratum in today’s philosophical context. 
 2  For a short but illuminating characterization of the two schools and their differences see 
M. Friedman,  A Parting of the Ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger (Chicago: Open Court, 
2000), 25–37. 
 3  See K. Schuhmann,  Die Dialektik der Phänomenologie II: Reine Phänomenologie und phänom-
enologische Philosophie. Historisch-analytische Monographie über Husserls ‘Ideen I’ (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973), 3. 
73
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
 Eidetics, Intuition, and Conceptual Knowledge 
 In 1911, after reading Husserl’s article, “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft,” 
in the  ﬁ rst issue of  Logos —the newborn of ﬁ cial organ of Southwestern Neo-
Kantianism—Heinrich Rickert (1863–1936) wrote an enthusiastic letter to the 
founder of phenomenology saying, “I believe that overall our paths will get closer 
and closer to one another.” 4 It was Rickert himself who urged Husserl to participate 
in the  Logos project, both as a member of the scienti ﬁ c board and as a contributor. 
In Rickert’s eyes, “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” represented a signi ﬁ cant 
step forward vis-à-vis the  Logische Untersuchungen : Husserl was now able to 
locate his project explicitly within the philosophical debate of his time in terms of 
a “scienti ﬁ c philosophy” which is hostile to both naturalism and historicism. In 
so doing, phenomenology placed itself within the same theoretical space as Neo-
Kantianism and articulated its standpoint in contrast to the same rivals. 
 Considering this thoroughly concordant point of departure, it is all the more 
puzzling at  ﬁ rst to read a strong attack against phenomenology in Rickert’s 
polemical essay  Die Philosophie des Lebens (1920).  Die Philosophie des Lebens 
targets what Rickert considers a trend in early twentieth Century philosophy frivo-
lous but dangerously widespread: the emphasis on “life” as more fundamental than 
rationality and on immediate ‘intuition’ as opposed to conceptual knowledge. 
Unexpectedly, Husserl’s phenomenology is listed together with Dilthey’s historicism, 
Bergson’s and Simmel’s  Lebensphilosophie and various forms of biological vitalism 
as a philosophy “devoid of principles [ prinzipienlos ]” that even “elevate[s] the lack 
of principles to a philosophical principle”(!) 5 What led Rickert to change his opinion 
of phenomenology so radically? He explains his position with great clarity in the 
following passage:
 What matters here is obviously not the articulation of the logical vis-à-vis the psychological: 
this, in fact, can only lead to a refusal of a philosophy of mere life. Rather, what matters is 
the doctrine of the “vision of essence [ Wesensschau ]” which Husserl intends to appoint as 
fundamental science for all philosophy and which granted him followers. Albeit with a 
conscious one-sidedness and to this extent unfairly, we try to interpret this doctrine too as a 
contemporary trend connected to the inclinations towards  Erlebnis , considering that 
phenomenology means the doctrine of a newly discovered kind of intuitive and immediate 
“phenomena [ Erscheinungen ].” 6 
 In the footnote at the end of this passage Rickert quotes explicitly Husserl’s 
 Ideen I as the source for his critical understanding of  Wesensschau . 
 It is important to underscore that Rickert’s critique is not directed against the 
concept of essence as such; the idea that a scienti ﬁ c philosophy must yield essential, 
non-empirical knowledge was already prominent in Husserl’s “Philosophie als 
 4  K. Schuhmann, ed.,  Edmund Husserl: Briefwechsel (Springer, 1994), V 171. 
 5  H. Rickert,  Die Philosophie des Lebens: Darstellung und Kritik der philosophischen Modeströ-
mungen unserer Zeit (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1920), 50. 
 6  H. Rickert,  Die Philosophie des Lebens, 28 f. 
74
A. Staiti
strenge Wissenschaft,” the paper about which Rickert was quite enthusiastic. 7 The 
controversial element, which was not as prominent in Husserl’s previous work but 
is strongly emphasized in the  Ideen , is the claim about essential knowledge being a 
form of  intuitive knowledge, legitimately comparable to sensory vision. Husserl’s 
statements on this point are famous: “ The essence (Eidos) is a new sort of object. 
Just as the datum of individual or experiencing intuition is an individual object, so 
the datum of eidetic intuition is pure essence. Not a merely external analogy, but a 
radical community is present here.  Seeing an essence is also precisely an intuition , 
just as an eidetic object is precisely an object.” 8 A few pages later Husserl even 
reinforces his view by seemingly suggesting not only that essences are objects given 
intuitively just like perceptual objects, but also that everyone is good at intuiting 
essences: “The truth is that all human beings see ‘ Ideen ,’ ‘essences,’ and see them, 
so to speak, continuously.” 9 In fact, there is something utterly plain and non-emphatic 
to Husserl’s presentation of  Wesensschau : “Thus, for example, any tone in and of 
itself has an essence and, highest of all, the universal essence tone as such, or rather 
sound as such—taken purely as the moment that can be singled out intuitively in the 
individual tone (alone, or else by comparing one tone with others as ‘something 
common’).” 10 
 On Husserl’s account, every time we hear a tone we also co-intuit the essence 
“tone as such,” which is why I can wonder, e.g., whether the whistle I heard was the 
whistle of the train or the whistle of someone calling her dog but not whether what 
I sensed was a tone or a smell. In other words, every tone I hear can at any time be 
taken as an example of a ‘tone in general.’ For Husserl, this basic fact has little to do 
with intellectual concept-formation and it would be wrong to understand a situation 
like the one just mentioned in terms of the intellect or some hidden faculty being at 
work, enhancing raw sensations with non-sensible categories. 
 Rickert, on his part, contends that such a fact cannot be produced as an example 
of genuine  knowledge . Genuine knowledge, for him, is always the result of concep-
tual mediation and thus implies a departure from a merely receptive intuitive dimen-
sion. Knowledge is always necessarily discursive and thus the claim of some sort of 
non- or pre-discursive  knowledge  is for Rickert a  contradictio in adjecto . We attain 
scienti ﬁ c knowledge  only to the extent that we “re-model [ Umformen ]” our immediate 
intuitions by means of concepts and in so doing we bestow upon them order and 
articulation. For Rickert, Husserl’s emphasis on essential knowledge being a form 
of intuition can be viewed as a particularly clear instance of what he calls  intuitionism , 
a widespread theoretical “shortcut” that demeans the toil of conceptualization in 
philosophy by overemphasizing and misinterpreting the role of intuition. 11 
 7  See E. Husserl,  Philosophy as a Rigorous Science , in E. Husserl,  Shorter Works (Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), 173. 
 8  Ideen I , 9. 
 9  Ideen I , 41. 
 10  Ideen I , 8. 
 11  In a recent paper, Helmut Holzey offers a convincing sketch of the Neo-Kantian critique of the 
concept of intuition: H. Holzey,  “Neo-Kantianism and Phenomenology: The Problem of Intuition,” 
Neokantianism in Contemporary Philosophy , eds. R. A. Makkreel and S. Luft (Bloomington: 
75
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
 Virulent critiques against every form of intuitionism are present in several essays 
and book chapters and represent the backbone of Rickert’s philosophical work from 
the 1920s onwards. In his last essay, “Kennen und Erkennen” (published in 1934, 
more than 20 years after the publication of Husserl’s  Ideen ), 12 he launches a further 
attack against phenomenology by analyzing the very same example given by Husserl 
at the outset of the  Ideen and offering a different account of the way we grasp the 
“essence” of a tone. That the addressee of Rickert’s polemic is still Husserl, and in 
particular the Husserl of the  Ideen is quite unmistakable considering the example 
and the language Rickert uses. As the title of his paper suggests, there is a sharp 
difference between sheer  acquaintance [ Kenntnis ] with the intuitively given indi-
vidual tone and scienti ﬁ c  knowledge [ Erkenntnis ] of the essence of a tone as such. 
The intuited tone is given to us “at one fell swoop [ mit einem Schlage ].” 13  A process 
of knowledge begins when we start to analyze the intuited tone and differentiate 
between several elements pertaining to it: “The sheer intuition of the tone gives 
‘everything at one fell swoop.’ Knowledge does not and cannot do so. Rather, 
knowledge dissects through a number of assertions the single tone—which we per-
ceive intuitively ‘as a whole’—into a series of ‘moments.’ Such moments are fused 
together immediately and intuitively only in perception. Within knowledge, these 
moments must be separated from each other and become the objects of predications 
each one for itself.” 14 It is only  after the intuitively given tone undergoes such a dis-
section into a variety of moments (intensity, duration, pitch, etc.) that we can dis-
cern the essentiality of some of these moments for  any tone whatever . 
 The following passage is crucial to interpret correctly Rickert’s most mature 
critique of Husserl’s  Wesensschau : “Therein and  only therein [in the process of 
cognitive dissection] do we  ﬁ nd the general ‘essence’ of the tone that we previously 
intuited in perception. In other words, only in this way we attain knowledge of the 
tone as tone; of that tone which beforehand we only made acquaintance of intui-
tively. But then with our knowledge we went way beyond intuitive acquaintance. 
Such a process, which discloses for us the essence of something, can by no means 
be understood as a form of …intuition. Rather, through our act of knowledge we 
necessarily restructure [ umbilden ] the cognitional material given to us in intuition 
… Such a restructuring is unavoidable for every knowledge which endeavors to 
delve into the general ‘essence’ of something.” 15 
 From a phenomenological point of view it would be quite simple, perhaps all too 
simple, to dismiss these critiques by rejecting the notion of intuition Rickert operates 
with as too narrow. Indeed, Husserl works with a broad concept of  Anschauung 
Indiana University Press, 2010), 25–40. However, in spite of the rather broad formulation in the 
title, he considers exclusively Natorp’s thought and ignores Rickert’s contribution on this issue. 
It seems to me, however, that Rickert’s critique of phenomenological intuition is actually much 
more re ﬂ ected and sophisticated than Natorp’s. 
 12  H. Rickert, “Kennen und Erkennen. Kritische Bemerkungen zum theoretischen Intuitionismus,” 
 Kant Studien 39 (1934): 139–55. 
 13  Ibid., 149. 
 14  Ibid. 
 15  Ibid., 150. 
76
A. Staiti
which shares little with Kant’s. Whereas for Kant intuition amounts to the blind 
intake of sense-data (at least as far as a  ﬁ nite intellect is concerned), 16 for Husserl 
intuitions come to ful ﬁ ll previously “empty intentions.” This ful ﬁ lling function is 
exerted by sensuous intuitions when the previously empty intention is a partial 
perceptual intention and by a combination of sensuous and non-sensuous intuitions 
when the previously empty intention is a higher-order intention presenting a whole 
state of affairs, e.g., a judgment or an aesthetic evaluation. 
 However, it should be emphasized that Rickert’s point in his critique of intuition-
ism does not follow the Kantian orthodoxy, according to which intuition would 
provide exclusively  sensuous material and therefore all non-sensuous components 
of experience must derive from the intellect. In another essay, written a few years 
earlier, Rickert was adamant that not only sensuous material but also “ non-sensuous 
[material] is immediately given in intuition” 17 and that “ the non-sensuous [material] 
 lies in our immediate lived-experiences or intuitions beside the sensuous [material] 
 as a wholly autonomous ‘ Quality .’” 18 To speak the language of phenomenology, not 
only perceptual things but also meanings, general and formal objects, are in a robust 
sense  given and not imposed on or applied to sensuous content. In the example of a 
tone, not only sensuous acoustic data is given in intuition but also elements of gen-
erality that we subsequently express with concepts such as pitch and intensity. 
Rickert would be of one mind with Husserl in emphasizing the necessity to broaden 
the concept of intuition and extend it to elements of generality and meaning within 
experience. 
 However, Rickert wants to underscore that the intuitive  givenness of elements of 
generality cannot yet be considered  knowledge, let alone essential, scienti ﬁ c knowl-
edge. Essential knowledge is for Rickert a process of  transformation of the given 
according to demands and criteria that are not extracted from the given but rather 
 ﬂ ow from the cognizing agent. Of course, we do not have intuition only of the sensible 
but also, in Rickert’s language, of the “intelligible.” 19  But intuition only provides the 
material, be it sensible or intelligible . It is our task as rational agents thereupon to 
carve our concepts so that we can make a systematic theoretical  kosmos out of the 
scattered fragments of intelligibility given to us in sheer intuition and thereby bring 
about essential knowledge. We need to reorganize conceptually also the non-sensuous 
elements of intelligibility given in intuition in order to transform a fragmented 
“chaos of manifestations [ Gewühl von Erscheinungen ]” into a proper  mundus 
intelligibilis . 20 Husserl’s emphasis on intuition is for Rickert only a rhetorical expedient 
 16  I am obviously referring to empirical intuition and not to the pure intuition of space and time in 
Kant’s transcendental aesthetics, a doctrine that both Husserl and the Neo-Kantians rejected as 
utterly untenable for reasons that need not occupy us here. 
 17  H. Rickert, “Die Methode der Philosophie und das Unmittelbare,”  Philosophische Aufsätze 
(Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1999), 128. 
 18  Ibid., 136. 
 19  Ibid., 140. 
 20  See ibid., 139. 
77
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
to downplay the role of conceptual constructions in  his own thought and in so doing 
create a result which is appealing to younger generations. This is why he charges 
Husserl of practicing an “… ostrich philosophy. Due to fear of constructions he 
sticks his head in the sand of intuitions, in order not to have to see the constructions 
he cannot do without.” 21 
 The same line of criticism is expressed in Paul Natorp’s review of Husserl’s 
 Ideen , published in the 1917/1918 issue of  Logos . After declaring his interest in 
Husserl’s project of a pure phenomenology, that he perceives as close to his own 
project of a critical psychology, Natorp focuses of Husserl’s concept of intuition and 
essence. He expresses his concerns by questioning Husserl’s talk of an “originarily 
 giving act  or  consciousness ” that presents us intuitively with essences. 22 The word 
 Anschauung , intuition, suggests a “passive receiving” 23 of the corresponding object. 
However, Husserl’s insistence on  Wesensschau being a  giving act [ ein gebender 
Akt ] seems to suggest that in this connection we cannot understand intuition in 
terms of sheer receptivity. Natorp suggests, paraphrasing Kant, that with a priori 
knowledge “there is an  originary appropriation of something that was by no means 
already there beforehand.” 24 In other words, we still can use metaphors such as 
grasping, seeing, and intuiting to underscore how we do not arbitrarily create a 
priori knowledge but rather follow a necessity that belongs to the ‘things themselves.’ 
On the other hand, we have to be aware of the fact that a priori knowledge pertains 
to a more fundamental “continuity of thought” 25 that connects, disconnects, distin-
guishes, and articulates. Every isolated positing of an essence conceals the underlying 
“process of thought, which is the authentic ‘giver’ of essences.” 26 The emphasis on 
the processual nature of eidetic knowledge is thus manifestly a point on which 
Rickert and Natorp are in agreement against Husserl. 
 However, Natorp reinforces this idea by taking Plato’s thought explicitly into 
the account, considering how Husserl always hinted at Plato as his major source of 
inspiration concerning eidetics. 27 Natorp, who was on his part a reputable interpreter 
of Plato’s thought, decrees that while Husserl “did reach Plato’s  eidos , however, he 
stood still at the  ﬁ rst level of Platonism, i.e., the level of rigid  eidē ‘standing there in 
 21  Ibid., 117. The one just offered is but a sketch of Rickert’s epistemology. For a thoughtful 
presentation of the latter see A. Zijderverld,  Rickert’s Relevance: The Ontological Nature and 
Epistemological Function of Values (Leiden: Brill, 2006), 85–137. 
 22  P. Natorp, “Husserls ‘Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie,’”  Husserl , ed. H. Noack (Darmstadt: 
WBG, 1973), 40. 
 23  Ibid. 
 24  Ibid., 41. 
 25  Ibid., 42. 
 26  Ibid., 43. 
 27  Karl-Heinz Lembeck points out correctly that Natorp’s intention in his review can be viewed as 
the attempt to give a new interpretation to Husserl’s concept of intuition based on a ‘dynamic’ 
understanding of Plato’s theory of Ideen (Karl-Heinz Lembeck, “Begründungsphilosophische 
Perspektiven: Husserl und Natorp über Anschauung,”  Phänomenologische Forschungen (2003): 
97–108.) 
78
A. Staiti
being’ motionlessly. He did not follow Plato’s last step, which was actually Plato’s 
greatest and most characteristic step: bringing the  eidē into  motion and  ﬂ uidifying 
them into the ultimate continuity of the process of thought.” 28 Natorp refers here to 
Plato’s dialectical method as the way to grasp the essence of things. 29 
 To summarize, we can identify two closely related critiques of Husserl’s account 
of eidetic knowledge in  Ideen I from the Neo-Kantian camp: (1) Eidetic knowledge 
cannot be intuitive because intuition only grants the material of knowledge, be it 
sensible or intelligible. Knowledge is necessarily conceptual/discursive, and 
conceptualization involves a departure from the immediacy of intuition. (2) 
Eidetic knowledge is  processual . It is the result of a thought-process that needs to 
be taken into account if we want to be able to justify the validity of our eidetic 
insights. 
 Both critiques are compelling and force us to go beyond the letter of  Ideen I 
to provide a satisfying answer to them. In answering the  ﬁ rst critique, we have to 
concede to Rickert that intuition cannot  per se  already qualify as knowledge. 
This, however, is by no means Husserl’s claim. In  Ideen I, Husserl wants to empha-
size the fact that the scope of intuition is not restricted to sensibility but also includes 
ideal objects and, among them, essences to which all the a priori valid predications 
pertaining to a certain sector of reality (in Husserl’s terms: ontological regions) can 
be referred. He does not dwell as much on how the intuitive givenness of essences 
can function as the basis for a  science of essences , although he makes clear that 
precisely this is the project he envisions under the heading “phenomenology.” 
Accordingly, and in order to do justice to Husserl’s project, we have to draw a 
distinction between intuitive  vision of essence and conceptual  knowledge of essence , 
i.e., between  Wesensschau and  Wesenserkenntnis . 30 Having an intuitive vision of 
essence does not yet amount to having a fully articulated knowledge of that essence. 
 Husserl’s awareness of this distinction can be exempli ﬁ ed by reference to his 
studies on nature and spirit, developed in the second book of the  Ideen , where he 
endeavors to articulate an ontology of nature and an ontology of spirit and in so 
doing to clarify the distinction between the natural and human sciences. On the 
one hand, he points out that we have to interrogate our pre-predicative experience 
 28  Ibid., 44. 
 29  This is not the place to expand further on Natorp’s idiosyncratic reading of Plato. See P. Natorp, 
 Plato’s Theory of Ideen: An Introduction to Idealism (Sankt Augustin: Academia, 2004). 
 30  The distinction between  Wesensschau and  Wesenserkenntnis has been recently addressed and 
framed in terms of an intuition of essence “before” and “after” an eidetic judgment has been issued 
in C. Majolino, “La Partition du réel: Remarques sur l’eidos, la phantasia, l’effondrement du 
monde et l’être absolu de la conscience,,”  Philosophy, Phenomenology, Sciences—Essays in 
Commemoration of Edmund Husserl , eds. C. Ierna, H. Jacobs, and F. Mattens (Dordrecht: Springer 
2010), 573–660. Here, 593. Whereas the intuition of essence before an eidetic judgment simply 
consists in the possibility of viewing an individual as an example of its class ( this tone is also  a 
tone) through a corresponding shift of attitude, the transition to a pure  eidos and thereby the intui-
tive vision of an essence as ful ﬁ lling intuitively an eidetic judgment requires a speci ﬁ c method of 
disengagement of reality and phantasy-variation. I cannot expand further on this point here but I wish 
to refer to Majolino’s excellent work for an extended and convincing treatment. 
79
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
and gain an insight into the intuitively given essence of each domain. On the 
other hand, he underscores the necessity to select the correct conceptuality to build 
up an eidetic  science of nature and an eidetic  science of spirit. There is a kind of 
conceptuality that faithfully brings to expression what has been  seen through 
 Wesensschau and a kind of conceptuality that is at odds with the corresponding 
 Wesensschau . 
 The conceptuality of mechanistic causality, for instance, is at odds with the kind 
of eidetic insight that characterizes our experience of mentality. To bring this eidetic 
insight to expression, we need to replace mechanistic conceptuality with the 
conceptuality of motivation if we are to grant truly phenomenological scienti ﬁ city 
to our ontology of mentality. This is why Husserl characterizes natural causality as 
“extra-essential [ außerwesentlich ]” 31 when we consider the unfolding of psychic 
life. We can of course employ the conceptuality of mechanistic causality to explain 
the connection between two mental events, say, (A) “reading in the newspaper 
about the economic crisis” and (B) “deciding to run to the bank to withdraw all my 
money.” We could for instance observe the con ﬁ gurations of neuronal activity in the 
brain in A and B and, by way of repeatedly observing and hypothesizing,  ﬁ nally 
discover the causal law regulating the transition from A-like states to B-like states. 32 
The kind of knowledge attained in this case is by no means false or trivial for a 
phenomenologist. 
 Rather, as far as mentality is concerned, it is extra-essential knowledge because 
the conceptuality at work does not match with the eidetic intuition of the purely 
motivational connection linking A and B, the essential features of which should be 
brought to conceptual expression in a signi ﬁ cantly different way.  Essential knowl-
edge is concept-formation in accord with an underlying vision of essence .  Extra-
essential knowledge is concept-formation following theoretical demands other than 
those suggested by an underlying vision of essence . 33 In this sense and in keeping 
 31  Edmund Husserl, Ms. A VI 16/ 25a, edited by U. Melle, published in  Issues in Husserl’s Ideen 
II, eds. T. Nenon and L. Embree (Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 1996), 2. 
 32  Whether or not there really are such things—i.e., a causal laws formulable in mathematical terms 
that regulate the transition from a state belonging to a certain psychic class and to a state of a dif-
ferent class—is a complex question with no obvious answer, in spite of all recent enthusiasm for 
so-called reductive theories of mentality. 
 33  Interestingly, this position comes close to that of another Neo-Kantian philosopher: Rickert’s 
student Emil Lask. In his insightful re ﬂ ections on Lask’s philosophy, Steven Galt Crowell writes: 
“Thus the problems of knowledge appears as the problem of choosing (or discovering) the proper 
category for given material … . Error, on this view, consists in predicating of some material a 
category in which it does not stand,”  Husserl, Heidegger and the Space of Meaning: Paths toward 
Transcendental Phenomenology (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001), 63–64. 
However, Husserl is less exclusive than Lask. Extra-essential knowledge, although not in accord 
with an underlying vision of essence (in Lask’s language: category), is not to be deemed erroneous 
outright. It is regrettable that Lask passed away before having the opportunity to read Husserl’s 
 Ideen  which, I believe, would have offered precious insights to carry forward his own philosophical 
project had he been able to develop it further. 
80
A. Staiti
with the spirit of Rickert’s critique, essential knowledge is not some sort of mystical 
intensi ﬁ cation of vision of essence, but an essentially different kind of accom-
plishment. The  ﬁ rst is concept-formation  on the basis of the latter. Troubles and 
crises arise when extra-essential knowledge supplants essential knowledge and thereby 
blurs the underlying vision of essence, as is the case with empirical psychology and 
mentality. 
 Once the distinction between  Wesensschau and  Wesenserkenntnis has been estab-
lished, we can also argue for a certain superiority of Husserl’s position over Rickert’s: 
Rickert has no robust account of the boundaries imposed to concept-formation from 
experience. 34 We cannot form concepts of any sort if we intend to produce essential 
knowledge about a given sector of reality. We have to hold fast to an underlying 
eidetic intuition and orient our conceptualization to a faithful articulation of the 
essence as it is given intuitively. In a certain sense it holds true that intuitions are 
reorganized in cognition, as Rickert would have it. This is true for both empirical 
and eidetic intuitions. But not every form of conceptual reorganization is equally 
legitimate for every kind of intuition. If we want to attain  essential knowledge we 
rather have to mold our concepts according to an underlying essential intuition, 
which expressed in Husserlian language means, we have to verify that the connections 
of concepts that we use to describe an essence can be really intuitively ful ﬁ lled. 
 With the above considerations we also have the resources to answer the second 
critical remark, according to which eidetic knowledge is necessarily processual and 
not a momentary insight. Natorp is right to quote Plato and highlight the difference 
between Husserl’s and Plato’s conceptions of essence. Famously, Plato maintains 
that we can never “see” essences directly in our earthly life. The act of ‘seeing an 
essence’ (on earth) is for Plato a metaphor for a  dialectical and thus mediated act of 
discovering true relations in the intelligible realm. We only “see” an essence, albeit 
imperfectly, to the extent that we are able to produce a de ﬁ nition and justify it 
within a system of logically connected de ﬁ nitions by means of dialectical reasoning. 
This is why “seeing an essence” and “producing a de ﬁ nition” are synonymous in 
Plato’s thought. By recasting Plato’s conception, Natorp thus fails to distinguish 
between  Wesensschau and  Wesenserkenntnis and seems to suggest that on closer 
inspection  Wesensschau is actually nothing but  Wesenserkenntnis and, to be precise, 
 Wesenserkenntnis before the task of logical and conceptual justi ﬁ cation is under-
taken. 35 Natorp here represents a longstanding tradition in philosophy according to 
which essences “manifest themselves” only in cognition. On this account, ‘seeing 
an essence’ amounts by necessity to ‘having a successful intellective grasp of a 
general truth.’ The kind of subjective act in which essences manifest themselves in 
the  ﬁ rst place would be, accordingly, true de ﬁ nition. But de ﬁ nitions are always 
 34  On the contrary, I think, that the idea of  experiential boundaries imposed on concept-formation 
if this latter is to attain essential knowledge represents the really crucial novelty that stems from 
Husserl’s eidetics. 
 35  For a brief but illuminating characterization of the Neo-Kantian idea of justi ﬁ cation in transcen-
dental philosophy and its difference from Husserl’s phenomenology, see Steven Galt Crowell, 
 Husserl, Heidegger and the Space of Meaning , 173–74. 
81
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
necessarily relational and involve a thought-process of comparison and distinction 
in order to be articulated. Therefore no essence can be posited in isolation from the 
continuity of thought that makes de ﬁ nition possible. 
 Husserl does not follow Plato and the tradition stemming from his philosophy on 
this point. By simply seeing an essence we do not necessarily acquire knowledge of 
some sort. For Husserl a “vision of essence” is  not the culmination of a cognitive 
process of abstraction from the objects in the visible world. Essences are not entities 
whose vision coincides with or is a metaphor of successful cognitive achievement. 
Rather, essences are for Husserl objects in a robust formal-logical sense, i.e., 
substrates for true or  false predications. Such substrates tacitly accompany the 
givenness of every individual in experience although remaining in most cases 
unthematized. The idea of an unthematized, unclear or unaware vision of essence 
is absolutely alien to a Platonic framework, within which seeing an essence is a 
metaphor for a successful intellection. Husserl’s following remarks, on the contrary, 
are eloquent enough: “[An essence is] something that can be thought of vaguely or 
distinctly, which can be made the subject of true and false predications” 36 ; “essences 
can be an intuitive consciousness of essences, in a certain manner they can also be 
seized upon, without becoming ‘objects about which’” 37 ; “like other objects 
[essences] can at times be intended to correctly, at times falsely, as, e.g., in false 
geometrical thinking” 38 ; “the consciousness of the givenness of an essence [is] 
mostly not adequate ideation in which the essence comes to a full and authentic 
givenness.” 39 
 Considering these quotations, in particular the last one, we can see why Husserl 
does not see a contradiction in the intuitive  and at the same time actively “giving” 
trait of  Wesensschau , viz., ideation: The process of eidetic cognition starts off with 
the mostly vague and unthematic givenness of a certain essence. The  ﬁ rst step 
forward consists in a thematization and clari ﬁ cation of this givenness by means of a 
methodological procedure later called by Husserl eidetic variation. 40 When we 
perform an eidetic variation we actively move from the awareness of a certain 
feature as belonging to a given instance, through a generalization of that feature for 
all instances of a certain class, and  ﬁ nally to the redirection of the look from the 
 36  Ideen I , 10. 
 37  Ibid., 33. 
 38  Ibid., 44. Neither Plato nor Natorp would be willing to accept false geometrical thinking as a case 
in which a vision of essence is nonetheless operative. For Husserl, on the contrary, this would be a 
case of vision of essence followed by an unsuccessful attempt to gain knowledge of the corre-
sponding geometrical essence. 
 39  E. Husserl,  Vorlesungen über Bedeutungslehre: Sommersemester 1908 (Hua XXVI) (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1986), 108. 
 40  It should be remarked that the procedure of eidetic variation is not explicitly present in the  Ideen 
and is introduced by Husserl only later, especially in his lectures of transcendental logic in the 
1920s. However it has been convincingly shown that the method of eidetic variation is nothing but 
a re ﬁ nement of the procedure employed by Husserl from the start in his phenomenological analyses 
(See D. Lohmar, “Die phänomenologische Methode der Wesensschau und ihre Präzisierung als 
eidetische Variation,”  Phänomenologische Forschungen (2005): 65–91.) 
82
A. Staiti
in ﬁ nite variety of possible instances to an object of new kind: the essence of the 
class at issue, to which the feature is attributed. 
 To stay with the example of a tone, we start by hearing a tone and being aware of 
it  as a tone . Subsequently, after focusing on some of its underlying moments while 
holding the whole given tone  ﬁ rmly in grasp, we see with evidence that certain 
features of the given tone must be present a priori in “any tone whatever.” Varying 
the given tone and producing in imagination further examples is the best way to let 
the invariant elements of a tone in general stand out more clearly. At this point we 
can shift our attention from the in ﬁ nite variety of possible examples to an ideal 
object that is intuited as the  ideal carrier of all those features that pertain to any tone 
whatever. The “originarily giving act” of  Wesensschau is thus not, as Natorp would 
have it, a hidden construction or, as Plato would have it, the result of dialectical 
reasoning but a move from the unthematic to the thematic the function of which is 
to increase the clarity of the given essence. At this point, and only at this point, we 
are ready to articulate conceptual knowledge of essence and, for instance, write 
down the sentence “to the essence of a tone in general belong pitch and intensity.” 
In this sense, the essence is given to us in three guises: at  ﬁ rst  per spaeculum , as it 
were, i.e., through the lens of the individual that we choose to view as an example 
of its class. Second, through the process of phantasy-variation, as separate but not 
independent object that carries its own determinations and can at any time be 
referred back to an in ﬁ nite variety of possible individuals. Third, as the ful ﬁ lling 
factor of a potentially in ﬁ nite number of eidetic judgments, i.e., as the correlate of 
an inde ﬁ nitely articulable  Wesenserkenntnis . However, a synthesis of coincidence 
runs through all these forms of consciousness of an essence: it is one and the same 
essence that is vaguely, unthematically co-given at  ﬁ rst, then rendered the object of 
explicit consideration and  ﬁ nally cognized via connections of concepts of which it 
furnishes the intuitive ful ﬁ llment. 
 To sum up and conclude this section: I argue that the problems signalized by 
Rickert and Natorp about Husserl’s theory of essence can be overcome if we hold 
fast to (1) a robust distinction between  Wesensschau and  Wesenserkenntnis and 
(2) an understanding of the  giving act of Wesensschau as a movement from the 
unthematic to the thematic and not as a hidden, unexplicated process of conceptual 
thought. 41 
 Dif ﬁ culties with an Eidetic Science of Consciousness 
 After the distinction between unthematic, vague givenness of an essence, vision of 
essence and knowledge of essence has been established, we are equipped with 
the appropriate theoretical tools to face the next challenge posed to  Ideen I by the 
 41  In this sense, as Nicolas De Warren aptly emphasizes, “an ‘intuition of essence’ requires a complex 
form of activity and passivity.” Nicolas De Warren, “On Husserl’s Essentialism,”  International 
Journal of Philosophical Studies 14/2 (2006): 262. 
83
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
Neo-Kantians. This second challenge hits upon another crucial point of Husserlian 
phenomenology: its self-understanding as “a  descriptive eidetic doctrine of tran-
scendentally pure lived experiences [ Erlebnisse ]” 42 and the connected claim to be, 
as such, the most fundamental of all sciences. The underlying issue is manifestly 
one and the same, since the fundamentality Husserl claims for phenomenology rests 
on its investigating the domain of the “reality” presupposed by all further domains 
of reality: lived-experience. However, for the sake of clarity, it can be fruitfully 
articulated in two sub-points, addressed respectively by Natorp and by Rickert. The 
 ﬁ rst sub-point is whether the eidetic method presented above is really adequate 
for a philosophical study of subjectivity and experience. The second sub-point is 
whether the concept of  phenomenon , on which phenomenology rests, is really as 
fundamental as Husserl would have it, and therefore whether a phenomenology 
 per se is  ﬁ t to carry the burden of being the most fundamental of all sciences. Let 
us start with the  ﬁ rst sub-point and turn once more to Natorp’s review, in order to 
then conclude with a consideration of the second sub-point. 
 After a paraphrase of those chapters of  Ideen I devoted to the phenomenological 
reduction and the disclosure of pure consciousness, Natorp focuses on Husserl’s 
claim that every positing of being and value must refer back to a positing conscious-
ness which is not in turn posited on the basis of something else, but rather is 
immediately given. This positing consciousness is pure consciousness conceived of 
as “ phenomenological residuum ” 43 after all further positions of being have been 
suspended via  epochē. Its purity consists in its independency from empirical being 
and, in particular, from an empirical body. Its ‘conscious’ trait depends on the fact 
that after the performance of the phenomenological  epochē we are still dwelling in 
the realm of full-blown experiences, which we can thematize and study in a direct, 
intuition-based fashion. 
 According to Husserl, the kind of task connected to this discovery of pure 
consciousness is a description of its general structure (intentionality) and of the 
different classes of experience (perception, recollection, fantasy) from an eidetic 
point of view. But, Natorp asks, is the kind of knowledge that we thus acquire 
really  essential knowledge of pure consciousness? 44 In other passages of his work, 
Husserl characterizes the nexus of  Erlebnisse as a whole, not just as a patchwork of 
juxtaposed experiences but an in ﬁ nite and continuous  stream . But then, Natorp 
argues, on closer inspection “the stream in its streaming is something other than 
what can be grasped and  ﬁ xed in re ﬂ ection.” 45 Certainly, to a re ﬂ ective gaze pure 
consciousness  appears  as an enclosed nexus of lived experiences of different 
kinds. However—Natorp stands here very close Rickert’s remarks we discussed 
 42  Ideen I , 167. Translation modi ﬁ ed. 
 43  Ideen I , 65. 
 44  See Paul Natorp, “Husserls ‘Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie,’”  Husserl , ed. H. Noack 
(WBG: Darmstadt 1973), 49. 
 45  Ibid., 50. 
84
A. Staiti
above—“the ‘immediate’ of pure consciousness [i.e., pure consciousness as it 
appears to a re ﬂ ective gaze] is not already as such also immediately known [ erkannt ] 
or knowable.” 46 
 One could rephrase Natorp’s concern employing the Husserlian conceptuality 
worked out at the end of the previous paragraph: Pure consciousness manifests itself 
in a certain way under our re ﬂ ective regard. However, the sheer thematization 
of pure consciousness in re ﬂ ection is not yet knowledge of pure consciousness. 
We should ask ourselves, according to the above distinctions, whether the eidetic 
knowledge of consciousness envisioned by Husserl really catches …what is essen-
tial to consciousness! If our eidetic insight tells us that consciousness is essentially 
a  stream , then we will have to work out concepts and methods of investigation that 
do justice to its stream-like essential trait, provided we want to achieve essential and 
not extra-essential knowledge. But if we then set out with Husserl to analyze 
 Erlebnisse  (lived experiences), treating them as isolated object-like unities, and 
furthermore, try to ‘extract’ from them static essential structures such as “the  eidos 
of perception,” “the  eidos of recollection,” “the  eidos of imagination,” etc. are we 
not missing precisely what Husserl himself acknowledged as the essential trait of 
consciousness, namely, its being a stream? In Natorp’s words: “But in this way 
[i.e. via an eidetic analysis] is the  over ﬂ owing stream of consciousness not  brought 
to a halt against its own nature and is its  concreteness not resolved into a sum of 
 abstractions , in particular if thereby (following Husserl) the singular experience is 
immediately grasped in ‘ eidetic generality ’?” 47 
 Natorp’s counterproposal, presented in his  Allgemeine Psychologie , for dealing 
philosophically with the stream-like nature of consciousness can be left aside here. 48 
Rather, we should try to answer Natorp’s challenge using Husserlian resources. 
A  ﬁ rst, somewhat obvious but in no way trivial remark is that Natorp’s statement 
that “consciousness is essentially a stream” is not itself a stream but rather a piece 
of eidetic knowledge, based on eidetic intuition and conceptually expressed. 
Accordingly, we cannot escape eidetic knowledge or at least eidetic claims about 
consciousness if what we want is a  science (be it Husserl’s phenomenology or 
Natorp’s transcendental psychology) and not extemporaneous allusions. Furthermore, 
an accurate  Wesensschau  carried out on consciousness reveals that consciousness 
is not just a stream but rather a stream that assumes very speci ﬁ c forms. I do not 
know  what perceptions, recollections, expectations, fantasies, etc. I will have in the 
future but I know  that I will have all of them, or in other words,  that the forms my 
conscious life will take on will be necessarily and exclusively perceptions, recollections, 
 46  Ibid. 
 47  Ibid., 53. 
 48  This is what he called “reconstructive method.” For a full- ﬂ edged account of Natorp’s recon-
structive method, see Sebastian Luft, “Reconstruction and Reduction: Natorp and Husserl 
on Method and the Question of Subjectivity,”  Neokantianism in Contemporary Philosophy , eds. 
R. A. Makkreel and S. Luft (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2010), 59–91. 
85
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
expectations, fantasies and the like. Again, this insight is just as essential as the one 
referring to consciousness being a stream. There is a lot of difference between a 
formless torrential stream and a stream that  ﬂ ows obediently between well-formed 
banks. Consciousness in this metaphor resembles much more the second kind of 
stream than the  ﬁ rst. In this sense, the different classes of lived-experience and their 
eidetic investigation are not an abstract falsi ﬁ cation of consciousness’s stream-like 
nature but rather go hand in hand with it. 
 Phenomenologically speaking, we need both an eidetic study of  Erlebnisse and 
their basic intentional structure  as well as an eidetic study of the stream in which 
all these  Erlebnisse are embedded. Corresponding respectively to these two tasks 
are what Husserl calls static phenomenology and genetic phenomenology. Static 
phenomenology studies and classi ﬁ es different classes of experiences, whereas 
genetic phenomenology studies how experiences come about on the basis of more 
rudimentary elements, such as sensations or instincts, and how they are connected 
together through temporality and association. The in ﬂ uence of Natorp’s thought on 
Husserl’s development of a “genetic method” has been rightly emphasized by several 
scholars. 49 However, in a way that some scholarly work does not seem to adequately 
appreciate, Husserl’s move  towards  genetic phenomenology does not mean a move 
 away from static phenomenology or a change of mind about fundamental phenom-
enological concepts such as essence and intuition. 
 Husserl was well aware of the dynamic nature of consciousness much earlier than 
his publication of  Ideen I 50 as his famous 1904/1905 lectures on time-consciousness 
prove. 51 While it is true that the investigations carried out in these lectures are not 
yet termed genetic phenomenology, they already display a feature that will remain 
unvaried in the subsequent articulation of genetic phenomenology: Even when it 
comes to an investigation of the dynamic structures of consciousness, the phenom-
enologist is not concerned with facts but with essences. In this connection, such 
 49  The  ﬁ rst to underscore this in ﬂ uence was Iso Kern in his monumental work,  Husserl und Kant: 
Eine Untersuchung über Husserls Verhältnis zu Kant und zum Neukantianismus (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1964), 366 f. Recently Natorp’s in ﬂ uence on Husserl has been the object of 
renewed attention: Donn Welton,  The Systematicity of Husserl’s Transcendental Philosophy ,  The 
New Husserl: A Critical Reader , ed. D. Welton (Bloomington: Indiana University Press 2003), 
255–88; Sebastian Luft, “Natorp, Husserl und das Problem der Kontinuität von Leben, Wissenschaft 
und Philosophie,”  Phänomenologische Forschungen (2006): 99–134. 
 50  This is the substance of Husserl’s response to Natorp’s critical review of  Ideen and in a letter to 
the Neo-Kantian philosopher he writes: “I overcame the stage of static Platonism already more 
than one decade ago” (letter to Natorp, 29/06/1918,  Briefwechsel V, 135 f. Quoted in Sebastian 
Luft, “Natorp, Husserl und das Problem der Kontinuität von Leben, Wissenschaft und Philosophie,” 
106, n.18.) 
 51  Interestingly, in spite of all emphasis on the dynamic nature of consciousness, Natorp does not 
have a theory of time-consciousness. I cannot expand here on Husserl’s investigations of time-
consciousness and its import in genetic phenomenology. An illuminating study of these issues is 
offered by Nicolas De Warren,  Husserl and the Promise of Time: Subjectivity in Transcendental 
Phenomenology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009). 
86
A. Staiti
essences are the underpinning structures of a dynamic process. However, they are 
not themselves dynamic but rather, as Husserl puts it in a later manuscript, “ rigid 
lawfullnesses” 52 [ starre Gesetzlichkeiten ], rigid meaning invariable, selfsame 
validities. 53 For these, too, the ultimate source of legitimacy must be intuitiveness 
and not mere logical consistency or speculative construction. Husserl’s preoccupation 
with intuition and intuitive legitimatizing even in the dif ﬁ cult  ﬁ eld of genetic 
phenomena is witnessed, for instance, by his untiring work on the so-called time-
diagrams, which are meant to contribute precisely an intuitive legitimatizing for the 
complicated genetic structure that characterizes time-consciousness. 54 
 Natorp’s critical remarks on Husserl’s alleged static Platonism are thus only 
acceptable insofar as they gesture towards the necessity of a genetic phenomenology 
of pure consciousness, a chapter missing in  Ideen I . However, Natorp notwithstanding, 
both static  and genetic phenomenology are and must be eidetic sciences of conscious-
ness the aim of which is to achieve universal, rigid, and unchangeable validities 
and not just to defend the allegedly unobjecti ﬁ able  ﬂ uency of the stream of conscious-
ness. If the talk of genesis is to be justi ﬁ ed, one has to include in this very notion that 
‘something’ of which genesis is supposed to be the genesis. Husserl’s most important 
discovery is not simply that there is a genetic and dynamic trait to consciousness, 
but that this dynamic trait moves  teleologically towards its self-realization in lived-
experiences, the structure of which can be grasped in eidetic universality and does 
not depend on merely physiological underpinnings. Thus, out of raw hylē, full-blown 
 Erlebnisse are generated on the basis of which objects of all kinds and, ultimately, 
an existing world are posited. This entire dynamic, phrased by Husserl constitution, 
is describable through and through in eidetic terms. 
 52  E. Husserl,  Die Lebenswelt. Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution. Texte 
aus dem Nachlass (1916–1937) , ed. Rochus Sowa (Hua, 39) (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008), 11. My 
italics. 
 53  Sebastian Luft seems to downplay this important point when he writes: “Obviously, with a 
modi ﬁ cation of phenomenology’s  theme , the characterizing trait of eidetic science undergoes a 
transformation too. Accordingly, an eidetic science of transcendental subjectivity deals with ‘laws 
of genesis,’ such as the laws of motivation and association.” (Sebastian Luft, “Natorp, Husserl und 
das Problem der Kontinuität von Leben, Wissenschaft und Philosophie,” 124–125.) The allegation 
that static phenomenology deals with essences, whereas genetic phenomenology deals with eidetic 
laws is misleading for two interconnected reasons: (1) the concept of eidetic law is not peculiar to 
genetic phenomenology. Rather  every essence—also ‘static’ essences such as the essence of a tone 
or the essence of perception—can be converted into eidetic laws of the form “for every conceivable 
x: if x is an F then x is a G” (Rochus Sowa, “Husserls Idee einer nicht-empirischen Wissenschaft 
von der Lebenswelt,”  Husserl Studies 26 (2010): 59), for example, “if x is a tone then x is an entity 
with an intensity and a pitch.” (2) The “laws of genesis” too  qua eidetic laws can be in turn 
converted into “static essences,” or better, re-articulated in terms of a vision of essence, such as “to 
the essence of time-consciousness belongs the threefold structure retention/primary impression/
protention.” (The law-like formulation would be: “if x is a time-consciousness then x is an entity 
the structure of which is retention/primary impression/protention.”) 
 54  To learn about Husserl’s work on the diagrams see the instructive paper: James Dodd, “Reading 
Husserl’s Time-Diagrams from 1917/18,”  Husserl Studies 21 (2005): 111–37. 
87
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
 Conclusion: Phenomenology’s Foundational Claim 
 In light of these last remarks, which are meant to both reinforce phenomenology’s 
eidetic project and to highlight the necessity to extend it beyond the scope of static 
analyses, we can turn to the above-mentioned second aspect of this wave of criticism 
concerning phenomenology’s claim “to be the science fundamental to philosophy.” 55 
Although Natorp also expresses some serious doubts about this claim in his review, 56 
it is Rickert who voices the Neo-Kantian concerns vis-à-vis phenomenology’s 
self-understanding in the sharpest fashion. In  Ideen I Husserl famously insists on 
the fact that while all empirical being depends on phenomena of consciousness for 
its manifestation (and its cognition is thus mediated) phenomena of consciousness 
do not depend on further phenomena and are thus immediately and absolutely 
given. 57 However, Rickert points out that on closer inspection the very notion of 
‘phenomenon’ in construed in a threefold way. A phenomenon is necessarily a 
phenomenon  of something  for a subject. Even if we carry out a phenomenological 
reduction, as Husserl intends to do, and consider the object of the phenomenon 
purely as intended, “if the word phenomenon—on this condition—is not to become 
entirely meaningless, is a subject to whom the phenomenal [ das Erscheinende ] 
appears or who intends via the phenomena the unknown object that appears therein 
not even more necessary? How can one claim, however, to bring such an ego into 
the ‘phenomenological’ sphere just like the phenomena that appear to it? Does one 
not thereby have to leave the realm of the immediate in the  ﬁ rst place?” 58 In other 
words Rickert’s line of argument could run thus: Phenomenology is a science of 
phenomena that claims to be the fundamental science for philosophy. Fundamentality 
must go hand in hand with immediacy of the investigated object. Should phenomena 
turn out to refer necessarily to something other than phenomena, and thus not imme-
diately cognized, then it will be knowledge of this further element that deserves to 
be deemed fundamental. However, on closer inspection, the concept of phenomenon 
refers  per de ﬁ nitionem to something other than itself. Therefore phenomenology 
cannot be the fundamental science. 
 Rickert decrees with remarkable clarity that, “In a ‘phenomenology’ deserving 
this name one has to call immediate either the phenomena or the subject and, accord-
ingly, denominate mediate [ vermittelt ] either the phenomena or that subject for 
whom they are phenomena. In this respect already the concept of phenomenon—
should this word maintain its signi ﬁ cant meaning—introduces an element in the 
observation, through which the permanence within the immediate of unbroken 
 55  Ideen I , XVII. 
 56  See Paul Natorp, “Husserls ‘Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie,’”  Husserl , ed. H. Noack 
(WBG: Darmstadt 1973), 50. 
 57  See  Ideen I , 95–96. It is appropriate to recall that ‘phenomenon’ for Husserl amounts to ‘lived-
experience,’ i.e., perception, recollection, expectation and so forth. 
 58  H. Rickert,  Die Methode der Philosophie und das Unmittelbare , 115. 
88
A. Staiti
experience [ Erlebnis ] and its intuition is rendered a priori impossible.” 59 Leaving 
aside the vaguely Hegelian reminiscence of these remarks, the line of thought of 
which is  prima facie  very distant from Husserlian preoccupations, Rickert’s position 
could be pinned down to one rather blunt question: Does phenomenology merely 
 qua  science of phenomena have the resources to defend the claim of being the 
fundamental science for philosophy? And furthermore: Is the concept of phenom-
enon self-suf ﬁ cient when it comes to a genuinely philosophical assessment of the 
import of phenomenology? 
 With these sharp questions, Rickert touches undoubtedly on a crucial point and 
he is right to emphasize that phenomenology’s foundational claims cannot rest on 
an all too simple appeal to the immediacy of  cogitationes vis-à-vis the being 
manifested therein. However, Rickert notwithstanding, this does not cause any 
trouble to Husserl’s project but rather stimulates a practicing phenomenologist to 
take seriously the distinction articulated in the title of Husserl’s seminal work: the 
one between a pure phenomenology and a phenomenological philosophy. Just because 
phenomenology  begins with a direct investigation of phenomena of consciousness 
does not mean that phenomenology’s destiny is to  limit itself to a direct investiga-
tion of conscious phenomena. The articulation of a  pure phenomenology serves the 
purpose of establishing a solid ground to carry out an experience-based critique of 
knowledge. In this way, the project of phenomenology is not exhausted but 
only initiated. It is not simply  qua phenomenology (i.e.,  qua science of immedi-
ately given conscious phenomena) that phenomenology can live up to its claim to be 
the fundamental science for philosophy. Pure phenomenology displays its vocation 
to be phenomenological philosophy, i.e., to disclose fundamental philosophical 
truths that undergird any further form of knowledge, by taking its departure  in the 
‘sphere of phenomena’ in order to then move beyond phenomenality and in so doing 
reveal those truths that  ﬁ nd therein their intuitive ful ﬁ llment but necessarily transcend, 
in terms of validity, the sphere of direct descriptions of consciousness. It is always 
“ qua ” something more than just  pure phenomenology that phenomenology attends 
to its vocation of being the fundamental science for philosophy. 
 Thus, we have Husserl talking of his phenomenology  qua “eidetics of conscious-
ness,”  qua “transcendental egology,”  qua “intersubjective monadology” or  qua 
“ontology of the life-world.” These  qua -relations have been often wrongly inter-
preted as transformations of or shifts in phenomenology. On the contrary, they are 
a set of attempts of what at  ﬁ rst and necessarily must present itself as just pure 
phenomenology to articulate fundamental philosophical truths, thereby moving 
beyond a direct description of the immanent data of consciousness while not giving 
up the possibility to trace these truths back to experiential intuitions in which they 
are nonetheless grounded. To give an example, when pure phenomenology presents 
itself as a transcendental egology, Husserl clearly indicates that at stake is indeed a 
primacy of the  ego vis-à-vis the phenomena that appear to this  ego . This is not 
because the ego is ‘more immediate’ but because, as Rickert rightly acknowledges, 
 59  Ibid., 116. 
89
5 The  Ideen and Neo-Kantianism
phenomena are construed in an oriented fashion. They require an ego around which 
to be centered. The  ego of transcendental egology is thereby disclosed as the under-
lying factor that holds together the whole sphere of phenomenological givenness, 
although this insight may not be as immediate as, say, a simple re ﬂ ection on the 
perception I am having in this moment. The  prima facie immediacy attaching to 
single lived-experiences, such as my current perception, is the systematically  ﬁ rst 
stage we have to work our way through in order to reveal the true fundamentality of 
the perceiving ego, a truth that necessarily transcends just pure phenomenology and 
thus belongs to phenomenological philosophy. 
 Does this mean that when we talk about a pure ego we abandon  entirely the 
sphere of intuition, as Rickert would have it? The answer to this question has to be 
negative. We would have to abandon intuition, if by intuition we mean exclusively 
‘direct vision in re ﬂ ection’ or something along these lines. But this has never been 
Husserl’s only concept of intuition. Although the pure ego of transcendental egology 
cannot be located among its own phenomena in a direct fashion, there is plenty of 
ways to make the pure ego intuitive and its corresponding concept clear. For instance, 
we can describe the phenomena of attention, a kind of experience that remains 
inexplicable if we refuse to see an ego at work that gives its “assent” to what other-
wise would remain merely in the perceptual “background.” 60 Furthermore, we can 
describe voluntary acts, characterize them as acts springing from an inner ego-center, 
and  ﬁ nally contrast them to acts the source of which lies in the external world. 61 The 
list could go on. In all these cases we clarify the concept of ego, we make it intuitive 
by reference to directly describable experiences without for this reason pretending 
to “see” the ego in the same way in which we see a desk or the perception of a desk 
in re ﬂ ection. Similar clari ﬁ cations could be given about all fundamental truths 
pertaining to phenomenological philosophy, a task that would require much work 
and more space than this paper can offer. 
 To summarize and conclude, the Neo-Kantian critiques are precious because 
they compel the phenomenologist to shed clarifying light on crucial elements of his 
or her endeavor. When Rickert and Natorp cast doubt on the notion of  Wesensschau 
they offer the opportunity to distinguish between vision of essence and knowledge 
of essence and thereby clarify the kind of cognition phenomenology yields. When 
Natorp suggests that consciousness is dynamic and therefore the eidetic method 
might be intrinsically inadequate to capture what is essential to it, he necessitates 
a more accurate understanding of the relationship between static and genetic 
phenomenology like the one sketched above. Finally, Rickert’s remarks on the 
concept of phenomenon help appreciate the distinction between pure phenomenology 
 60  See  Ideen I , §37. 
 61  On this point and on Husserl’s indebtedness to Pfänder, see M. Ubiali, “Die Willensakte und 
der Umfang der Motivation: Eine Gegenüberstellung von Pfänder und Husserl,”  Geist–
Person–Gemeinschaft: Freiburger Beiträge zur Aktualität Husserls , eds. P. Merz, A. Staiti, and 
F. Steffen (Würzburg: Ergon, 2010), 241–67. 
90
A. Staiti
and phenomenological philosophy; it is not merely  qua  phenomenology that 
phenomenology is able to live up to its original claim of being the fundamental 
science for philosophy. Rather, by interpreting itself  qua egology,  qua eidetics,  qua 
monadology and so forth it attempts to transcend the sphere of mere re ﬂ ective 
description of consciousness and to articulate basic philosophical truths on which 
all further philosophical as well as empirical knowledge can be developed on a solid 
foundation. 
91
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_6, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Introduction 
 The purpose of this chapter is to investigate whether acts peculiar to the emotional 
sphere of experience (1) are  founded in epistemic objectivating acts or (2) have a 
 unique structure  that is independent of such acts. Do acts peculiar to the emotional 
sphere simply follow the coordinates of the noesis:noema structure of intentionality? 
Does the emotional sphere, which concerns the person (and not simply the epistemi-
cally engaged subject), have an essentially different structure? 
 We  ﬁ nd an initial discussion of such a problematic in Husserlian phenomenology, 
 ﬁ rst in Edmund Husserl’s  Logische Untersuchungen , and then later in his  Ideen. Let 
me  ﬁ rst explain what Husserl means by these kinds of acts and their relation of 
foundation. I then limit myself to one example of an emotional experience—trust—
examining it with attention to three structural characteristics, namely, otherness, 
temporality, and the modality of possibility. In this way, I can adduce the extent to 
which acts of the emotional sphere have a unique structure such that they are not 
merely modi ﬁ cations of objectivating acts. 
 Emotions as Non-objectivating and Founded Acts 
 While Edmund Husserl is often credited for realizing that consciousness is always 
consciousness of something, this insight was already well prepared by Descartes, 
Kant, and Hegel, among others. Husserl’s groundbreaking insights did not simply 
involve the discovery of the intentional structure of consciousness, but concerned 
his unique phenomenological approach that allowed him to describe the how of 
 A. J.  Steinbock (*)
 Department of Philosophy, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL, USA 
 Chapter 6 
 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions 
 Anthony  J.  Steinbock  
92
A.J. Steinbock
giving (sense, meaning) of what something is (the being of the object) in relation to 
the power and limits of subjectivity. In the  Logische Untersuchungen , Husserl 
described this relationship under the heading of “objectivating acts.” An objectivating 
act is that intentional act which “refers” to an object in and through a certain sense. 
Thus, an objectivating act is that kind of act which allows there to be an intending 
and intended object. This is known generally as the intentional structure, and is 
what Husserl also calls a process of  Gegenständlichung , that is, the process by 
which something acquires the status of a  constituted “object”; in this way the 
process is a kind of object-giving or “objectivating.” 
 An objectivating act is not only that intentional act in which, phenomenologi-
cally, an object is given as sense, but it is also such that it needs no additional, 
adjuncting act in order for an object to be given. A non-objectivating act is said to 
be an act that is “founded” on an objectivating act, requiring the latter’s structure. 1 
The objectivating act is what allows the non-objectivating act to have this inten-
tional structure, to have an act:sense correlation through which something is given 
beyond “myself” as the one who executes acts. Examples of non-objectivating acts 
are acts of valuing, willing, and emotional acts. 
 Husserl’s initial portrayal of the structure of objectivating acts is carried over into 
his discussion of the intentional relational in the  Ideen . In brief, the intentional 
structure that was characterized by means of the “quality” and the “material” of the 
act in the  Logische Untersuchungen is now described in the  Ideen (with certain 
quali ﬁ cations) in terms of the “noesis” or intending side of the relation and the 
“noema” or the intended side. 2 Furthermore, the characterization of the relationship 
between objectivating acts and non-objectivating acts is also carried over into 
Husserl’s discussion of intentionality. 3 After describing the “higher spheres” of 
consciousness in the noesis and noema of judgment, Husserl writes: “Analogous 
statements hold, then, as one can easily see, for the emotional and volitional spheres, 
for mental processes of liking or disliking, of valuing in any sense, of wishing, deciding, 
acting. All these are mental processes which contain many and often heterogeneous 
intentive strata, the noetic and, correspondingly, also the noematic ones.” 4 Thus, 
 1  Edmund Husserl,  Logische Untersuchungen. Band II: Untersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und 
Theorie der Erkenntnis, I. Teil (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1968), 493–94: “Wir dürfen nämlich sagen: 
Jedes intentionale Erlebnis ist entweder ein objektivierender Akt oder hat einen solchen Akt zur 
‘Grundlage’, d.h. er hat in diesem letzeren Falle einen objektiverenden Akt notwendig als 
Bestandstück in sich, dessen Gesamtmaterie zugleich, und zwar individuell identisch seine 
Gesamtmaterie ist.” See Robert Sokowloski,  The Formation of Husserl’s Concept of Constitution 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964) and Donn Welton,  The Origins of Meaning: A Critical Study 
of the Thresholds of Husserlian Phenomenology (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983). 
 2  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie, ed. W. Biemel (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1950). Husserliana Vol. 3. Hereafter, Hua 3. See especially, Part 3, Chapter 3. 
English translation by F. Kersten,  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a 
Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983). 
 3  Husserl, Hua 3, §§ 94–95. 
 4  Husserl, Hua 3, § 95. 
93
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
emotional acts are founded in more basic essential intentional epistemic acts. 
Accordingly, “… a perceiving, phantasizing, judging, or the like, founds a stratum 
of valuing which overlays it completely ….” 
 To say that emotional acts are founded in more basic intentional acts means for 
Husserl that the emotions are dependent upon “objectivating” ones because they 
require those characteristics of the latter in order for the “non-objectivating” act to 
mean something beyond itself as presented under a certain sense. Thus, either acts 
have an epistemic structure (basically a “rational” structure) or they are—in this 
case—the province of mere instinct and have no cognitive value. The founded acts 
are called “higher” because the noeses and noemata (acts and senses) are “built” 
upon the founding levels, though they, too, form a distinctive, new unity of epistemic 
processes such that the new object-structure will have its own modes of givenness, 
its “characters,” its manifold modes of being intended. 5 
 Even though the founding and founded dimensions constitute a new “object,” the 
founding relation is such that these “upper” levels and strata of the total phenomenon 
can be “abolished” without the remainder ceasing to be a concretely complete inten-
tional experience. 6  As noted, when describing the founding-founded structure of acts 
and senses in the  Ideen , Husserl initially considered examples of lived-experiences 
such as liking or disliking, valuing, wishing, deciding, or doing. Deciding, for example, 
belongs to the province of volition, but in order to will something and to decide as a 
willing, I still have to intend or “mean” the object in some way, where the meaning 
given is the meaning of the object. The “analogous” point Husserl wishes to draw 
here is that such experiences contain manifold intentional noetic and noematic strata. 7 
As intimated above, a new sense is constituted when it is founded upon, yet encom-
passing the founding structure. “The new sense brings a totally new dimension of 
sense,” for example, when we see not just the painting, but experience it as a beautiful 
painting, the machine as a useful machine, etc. 8  
 A valuing that is founded upon a “perceiving, imagining, judging, and the like,” 
by virtue of its adjunct status, quali ﬁ es the founding-founded whole as, e.g., a 
“wishing” (for the hot coffee over there) even though the valuing dimension can be 
removed, leaving intact,  mutatis mutandis , the perceiving founding stratum; or 
again it could be removed and leave a judicative dimension, e.g., “that the coffee is 
certainly hot.” Here, the founding-whole can also be teased apart from the founded 
without damaging the underlying basic structure. 
 Where valuing is concerned, then, Husserl suggests that the perceptual sense of 
the object, the perceived as such, belongs to the perception, but in higher order valuing, 
it is also integrated into the “valued” as such as a correlate to the concrete valuing, 
 5  Husserl, Hua 3, § 93. 
 6  Husserl, Hua 3, § 95: “Dabei sind die Schichtungen, allgemein gesprochen, so, dass oberste 
Schichten des Gesamtphänomens ‘fortfallen’ können, ohne dass das Übrige aufhörte, ein konkrete 
vollständiges intentionales Erlebnis zu sein ….” 
 7  Husserl, Hua 3, § 95. 
 8  Husserl, Hua 3, § 116. 
94
A.J. Steinbock
 whose sense it (the perceptual sense) founds. 9 Accordingly, we must distinguish the 
objects, things, characteristics, and affair-complexes that are given as valued in the 
valuing, and the presentings, judgings, imaginings, etc., which found the valuing, 
even though the whole new intending may give the object in a unique doxic modality, 
say, as “certainly ugly work of art,” or “probably useful machine.” 
 The relations of founding are multifarious, and can describe the relation of parts 
to wholes, 10 or the way in which the judgment (as the noematic correlate) is founded 
upon the perceptual sense, as the judging act is founded upon the perceiving as a 
being-positing process: Doubting-being, possible-being, deeming-being-likely, 
rejecting- or negating-being are all modi ﬁ cations of a basic “simple” givenness and 
positing of being that is given in a straightforward attitude. This is also the sense in 
which Husserl conceived of passive syntheses (in a “transcendental aesthetic”) to be 
founding for meaning constituted in active synthesis (peculiar to a “transcendental 
logic”). 11 
 Now, Husserl’s notion of foundation [ Fundierung ] is not the problematic issue 
here. In fact, it is one of those concepts that Eugen Fink termed “operative” in the 
sense it can be taken up in a variety of contexts, and depending upon the context, 
shift in nuance. 12  Husserl wants to stress by such a founding structure that the rela-
tion is not a causal one between, say, perceptual and emotional acts; nor even is it a 
“reciprocal” relation, which would presuppose an exchange of causes. Rather, the 
founded has to be understood as an “elaboration of” the founding beyond what 
could have been anticipated in advance, but to which the founding dimension gives 
a radically new meaning, and which it “needs” in order to be in this unique way. 13 
At issue for us is not the founding relation, then, but the fact that the emotional 
sphere is said to be founded in a more basic “epistemic” intentionality, meaning that 
the emotions are to be understood as having the same kind of intentional structure, 
the same kind of rational import, the same kind of givenness, evidence, etc. 
 9  Husserl, Hua 3, § 95. 
 10  Husserl,  Logische Untersuchungen , II/1, Part III. § 14. 
 11  Husserl, Hua 3, § 94. See also Edmund Husserl,  Analyses Concerning Passive and Active 
Synthesis: Lectures on Transcendental Logic , trans. Anthony J. Steinbock (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
2001), Division I on “Modalization” of Part 2. 
 12  See Eugen Fink, “Operative Begriffe in Husserls Phänomenologie” (1957),  Nähe unde Distanz: 
Phänomenologische Vortäge und Aufsätze (Freiburg: Alber Verlag, 1976), 180–204. 
 13  Merleau-Ponty writes: “Thus, every truth of fact is a truth of reason, and every truth of reason is a 
truth of fact. The relation between reason and fact, or between eternity and time, just like the relations 
between re ﬂ ection and the unre ﬂ ected, between thought and language, or between thought and 
perception, is the two-way relation that phenomenology has called “ Fundierung ” [foundation]. The 
founding term (time, the unre ﬂ ected, fact, language, perception) is primary in the sense that the 
founded is presented as a determination or a making-explicit of the founding term, which prevents 
it from ever fully absorbing the founding term; and yet the founding term is not primary in the empirical 
sense and the founded is not merely derived from it, since it is only through the founded that the 
founding appears. This is how one can say indifferently that the present is a sketch of eternity and that 
the eternity of the truth is only a sublimation of the present.” See Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 
 Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1945), 451. English translation by Donald 
Landes, Maurice Merleau-Ponty , Phenomenology of Perception (Routledge, forthcoming).  
95
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
 We can ask: Is Husserl correct when he contends that there are analogous 
distinctions in the emotional and volitional spheres of experience where this founding 
is concerned? Are the volitional and the emotional spheres of the same mettle such 
that we can make such a comparison in the  ﬁ rst place? Is the emotional sphere 
really analogous to the judicative, and in this way only to be actualized by being 
“founded” on the perceptual, objectivating, positing act, or even itself on a judging 
or an imagining act? If this is the case, then—to give just one example—trust 
would itself have to be either a kind of judgment, something founded in a decision 
to trust, or a blind belief. 
 To be sure, Husserl realizes it would be ridiculous to place the “valued” or the 
“likeable” in the same series as the “possible,” the “presumable,” or the “indeed.” 14 
But we must pursue this line of inquiry and ask whether emotional experiences are 
dependent upon such epistemic founding experiences so that only in this way do 
they have a cognitive dimension, and only in this way do they constitute a meaningful 
experience. Are they such that so-called strata could be stripped-off, leaving us with 
an integral, self-subsistent founding objectivating layer? Or are they to be under-
stood as self-subsistent, as another kind of act that has its own style of givenness, 
cognition, and evidence, irreducible to epistemic acts or to instinct? 
 Let me now advance to one case example of the emotions, trust , and examine 
three structural features of temporality, modalization of possibility, and otherness 
that can be found in these experiences. 15 
 A Phenomemological Case of the Emotions: Trust 
 In this section, I consider the experience of trust because it is an emotional act that 
could be construed as demanding what we have called “objectivating acts” at its 
foundation. As we will see, both phenomenologically inspired and non-phenome-
nological literature on these topics does in fact treat it in this way. For example, trust 
is regarded as a kind of judgment, as a rational decision, or as an epistemic assess-
ment of risk. I want to show—though what can only be a limited phenomenological 
analysis here—that the structures of trust in terms of its temporality, modalization 
of possibility, and relation to otherness suggest the order of a unique emotional 
sphere that is “non-founded” in the sense described above. 
 In order to see the distinctiveness of trust, let me contrast it from the start with 
the experience of reliability. Reliability is something that unfolds over time. For 
example, if I count my pen as reliable, it is because it has given itself as something 
I can count on again and again; it has a temporal density that extends from the past. 
 14  Husserl, Hua 3, § 116. 
 15  This example is drawn from previous work on the phenomenology of the emotions: Anthony J. 
Steinbock, “Temporality, Transcendence, and Being Bound to Others in Trust,”  Trust, Sociality, Selfhood 
in the Religion in Philosophy and Theology Series, 52, eds. Arne Grøn and Claudia Welz, 83–102.  
96
A.J. Steinbock
If I test drive a car for the  ﬁ rst time, I do not experience it immediately as reliable. 
It is true that I may like Hondas, and that I experience this particular car as reliable 
 because it is a Honda, but then the experience of reliability has shifted from this 
particular car to the general make of the car with which I have had good (past) expe-
riences. When I experience something in an originary manner, however, I do not 
experience it as reliable, or as unreliable for that matter. Accordingly, we can say 
that the past is essential for the general sphere of reliability. What I experience 
“now” calls back into the past and retrieves the experience, as it were, requalifying 
the same thing now  as reliable. 
 Moreover, something is experienced as reliable when it corresponds to my 
 expectation . On the basis of the present and the past, a futural horizon is sketched 
out that prepares us for the experience of reliability. I  anticipate the thing according 
to the style in which it has been given. If the thing gives itself in the way in which 
it was sketched out futurally, I can count the thing as reliable. Reliability, then, is a 
 straightforward mode of experience that is  motivated . When everything runs its 
course as it should, something can be experienced as reliable. There are no major 
disappointments, no major ruptures in my everyday belief posture; my orientation 
toward the thing remains unbroken; I live in the basic mode of certainty and its 
possible modi ﬁ cations. 
 Notice that reliability is more than the ful ﬁ llment of the anticipation. As I descend 
the staircase, even though I “protend” or implicitly expect the regularity of the steps 
in certainty (or modalized as probability), I do not  necessarily experience them as 
reliable. Reliability includes something more; it is not mere certainty, but a  practical 
mode of straightforward belief. Accordingly, reliability is not a probability, which 
is itself a modalization of expectation. For example, when I go to start the car on a 
cold day, my intention toward the car is that it will work, it will turn over: It is reliable. 
I do not approach it in the belief posture of probability. Or again, if I put the key in 
the ignition with the attitude that “it will  probably start,” I am no longer living the 
car as reliable. Probability is a mode of expectation. Reliability, however, is not a 
mode of expectation, even though expectation  ﬁ gures in the experience of reliability. 
It is a practical mode of straightforward belief. 
 This practical modality of reliability gives us a main leading clue to the experience 
of reliability in its distinction to trust. In reliability, there is the experience of the 
 functional character of the thing, which may include its instrumental character and 
its general use value, but in any case, all of this in the context of  practicality . 
Moreover, the experience of reliability presupposes that something may change in 
the regularity of givenness; its functional character can be disrupted, most often in 
terms of a mal- or dysfunction. For example, the Swiss or German rail system is 
experienced, by most of us anyway, as reliable, whereas Amtrak tends to be experi-
enced as unreliable. Let us turn now to the experience of trust. 
 While reliability is experienced only by virtue of a full temporal expanse that 
includes the past essentially, this need not be the case with trust. To be sure, we often 
speak of our “building up” trust in someone. But phenomenologically speaking, we 
do not need to be involved in a build-up of experiences stemming from the past in 
order to trust another, whereas this is essential for reliability. For example, I can 
97
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
trust someone I have never met to watch my computer in a café while I get a re ﬁ ll. 
While reliability is a relation of familiarity, trust is not necessarily so. It belongs to 
the essence of trust to be able to live through a trust act with a perfect stranger. 
Indeed, at times our lives may depend upon the trust of such a stranger. So, even 
though trust is not caused, it is not arbitrary, either. In a deeper sense then, the trust 
of a stranger means the trust of a person who is given not only as unknown but as 
unknowable, as “mystery.” 
 Trust does not depend upon the past, but on the givenness of the person through 
an insighting (that may be accurate or not) of the person from an originary encoun-
ter. Even if one has been betrayed in the past by the same person, it is  possible to 
trust this person anew, without any “proof” from the past. I do not trust someone 
who is compelled to do what I want or who is enslaved for any reason. In fact, 
enslaving someone—materially, emotionally, monetarily, physically—is the 
evidence of a lack of trust on some level. On the contrary, trust is a relaxing in or 
giving oneself over to the other precisely in light of the transcendence of the other. 
This goes not only to the creative, improvisational dimension of the one trusting, but 
of the trusted. It is likewise phenomenologically improper to speak of “earning 
trust.” 16 The sense of this earning would amount to what we mean by reliability. 
Trust, however, is an orientation to deeper possibilities (like loving), exposing one-
self to unforeseen dimensions of the person. Hence, there is a decisive orientation 
toward the future. Otherwise, it would not be possible to trust again. One can trust 
(again) on the basis of a new experience—perhaps in this instance by virtue of an 
insight into the internal coherence and directedness of the person—whereby trust is 
re-executed, freely, whereas reliability, as we saw, is rooted in the past. In fact, a 
new trust might run contrary to the past. Not trusting because there is no “proof” 
would be tantamount to wanting testimony and security in advance in order to trust. 
Perhaps such proof might be important at some level and in some circumstances; 
that is, perhaps there is a moment in which we have to have this kind of security, 
either politically or personally. Nevertheless, it would not (yet) be trust, and only 
limited to a search for reliability. Therefore the expression of “earning trust” is not 
really a matter of trust at all and is, phenomenologically speaking, contradictory. 
Al Lingis correctly notes, for example, that there can never be a demonstration of 
trustworthiness, since in trust we are oriented, in openness, toward transcendence, 
which is not known. All there can be is evidence of untrustworthiness. 17 
 Trust is intersubjectively temporalizing and one of the foundational elements in 
intersubjective life. It enables us to move into an open future with others. Trust is 
oriented temporally toward the future in the sense of intersubjective becoming. 
 16  Holmes and Rempel, for example, assert that one must “earn trust” by being “perceived as moti-
vated to moderate their own self-interest.” They mistakenly presuppose,  ﬁ rst, that trust is a matter 
of earning trust, and second that it is played out on the level  of self-interest (i.e., a perceived 
sacri ﬁ ce of self-interest). See John G. Holmes and John K. Rempel, “Trust in Close Relationships,” 
 Review of Personality and Social Psychology 10 (1989): 187–220. See esp. 188. 
 17  Alphonso Lingis,  The First Person Singular (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2007). 
See also, Alphonso Lingis,  Trust (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2004). 
98
A.J. Steinbock
I trust the person, now, whether or not that trust will be ful ﬁ lled, and it is still a trust 
act whether or not it is ful ﬁ lled. But while trusting entails the possible ful ﬁ llment of 
that trust,  it is not however a mere expectation ; nor is it founded in an expectation. 
It does not get modalized, for example, into a probability or improbability.  It is a 
unique act that has its own bearing on the future . This is not to say that trusting does 
not in ﬂ uence our expectations and anticipations. 18 It does. It is easy to  ﬁ nd examples 
of expectation where no trust is involved (the expectation of sunny weather, the 
anticipation of the outcome of a basketball game, and so forth). Intersubjectively 
speaking, there can be a coincidence of trust and expectation where the latter is 
guided by the former. For example, if I trust my children to act well at a family 
gathering, I will  ipso facto expect them to act well. Unlike reliability, however, trust 
does not completely coincide with an expectation. (Expectation does not exhaust 
the meaning of the interpersonal futural orientation.) 
 Trust has a unique temporal structure that I call a “proffering.” In trust, I proffer 
myself to another in an open future and toward that which the trust is directed, as 
being bound to this other person. I understand proffer here in its literal sense as 
pro-offer. Trusting is the temporalizing movement of “offering-ahead,” allowing the 
trust to go before us or pointing the way forward, as in a  pro lepsis. This temporal-
izing movement is, as well, a pro-offering in the sense of a “great offering”; I give 
myself over to another in trust toward an open future. In this respect, proffering is a 
“bearing forth,” a “gifting,”—expressive of its probable etymological sense as a 
“ pour-offrir ,” as they say in French when presenting a gift. Proffering is distinct 
from the expectation we might  ﬁ nd in reliability or in a perceptual act, and is even 
distinct from the “patient awaiting” we  ﬁ nd in hope, which is itself distinct from the 
active waiting-for that we  ﬁ nd in anticipation. 
 Does being a “trusting person” presuppose a build-up of experience? The issue 
for me in this investigation is to inquire into the basis of those presuppositions, how 
those experiences get built-up, how a person can become trusting in the  ﬁ rst place, 
which requires an inquiry into the how of the trusting movement, an investigation 
into how trusting proffers “in an originary fashion.” Nevertheless it is true that a 
more full investigation into trusting has to consider the phenomenon of the trusting 
person, and this would entail an investigation into the “genetic” accomplishment of 
trusting, how it is acquired, how trusting gets sedimented into the very life of trusting 
acts and how it becomes a stable basis for trusting a person. But, the dimension of 
the past comes into play when we are considering mistrust, not trust. 
 When I trust, I do more than merely live in a straightforward belief attitude; 
I invest myself “personally” in the other person, and therefore in what the other 
person says or in how the other person acts; I give myself over to him or over to her 
“word.”  Trust binds me to another . 19 In trust, I am bound to the other as transcendent 
 18  See for example Isaacs, et al., “Faith, Trust and Gullibility,”  International Journal of Psychoanalysis 
44 (1963): 461–69. 
 19  Accordingly, even if trust pertains to the acceptance of scienti ﬁ c truths, trusting itself still resides 
in the moral sphere because in this case it is that through which one scientist is bound to another. 
See for example, Markovits and Deutsch,  Fear of Science . And see, T. Porter,  Trust in Numbers: 
The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton: Princeton University Pr., 1995). 
See also, R. Crease, “The Paradox of Trust in Science,”  Physics World , March (2004): 18. 
99
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
or mystery directly, without requiring the mediation of a third person or something 
like a contract; I live in and through the trust with another immediately. The relation 
of trust, in fact, may remain completely invisible to a third party. To force trust 
putatively to be accessible to all by making it “objective” would only mitigate the 
very relational intimacy of this bond, even in its transitive mode. Thus, trusting and 
the trusted are not constituted like objects to which everyone can in principle take a 
perspective and contribute in this way to an intersubjective veri ﬁ cation. What this 
attempt could yield, however, is something like a “social contract” or a contract 
between individuals. However, not only would the latter presuppose trust, and the 
bond animated by it, but it could have the adverse effect of alienating individuals 
from one another in the very attempt to unite them because the contract (in distinction 
to trust) tends to set individuals off from each other in suspicious, controllable, and 
predictable manner. 
 Trust, as an interpersonal act (among others such as loving, witnessing, etc.) that 
is revelatory of the moral sphere, is qualitatively distinct from an epistemic act. 
Trusting cannot be equated with a mere presupposition, presumption, or assumption. 
By the latter experiences, we understand taking the being of the thing or event for 
granted in a straightforward “belief” attitude that is operative on all dimensions of 
existence. For example, I can presuppose the meaning of the educational system, 
and live in this system without question; I can make implicit epistemic assumptions 
about the correctness of a theoretical problem or a life situation; I can presume that 
the advice someone gives me is correct. 
 It is therefore not entirely correct to say that we are “naïve” in trust. It is true 
that in trust we bind ourselves to what is beyond that which is actually given in 
the present. However, while naïveté may be motivated by something actually 
given in experience (a perception, an idea, etc.) it may also arise without any 
such motivation. It can, for example, arise through an uncritical belief without 
any prior experiential basis. 
 Something different is going on in trust. Trust always occurs on the basis of some 
givenness, some insight into the other person (which may of course be “right on” or 
“off”). What is given is the whole person in light of this or that modality, fully, but 
not exhaustively. When we are bound to this person in trust on the basis of this 
givenness, we expose ourselves to more than what is given. This means two things. 
First, exposing ourselves by being bound to another in trust reveals us as  vulnerable . 
Vulnerability is essential to the trust-experience. 20 Second, we cannot con ﬂ ate the 
moral dimension of trust and the essential element of vulnerability with the epistemic 
dimension of judgment or assumption, which allows for the possibility of naïveté. 
So, while it is more apt to say that we are naïve in a judgment or an assumption, 
properly speaking, we are vulnerable in an act of trust. We only  believe what someone 
says because we trust her. In a similar way,  even our systems of knowledge are based 
on trust. 
 20  It is not, as Deutsch mistakenly assumes, a “con ﬁ dence that one will  ﬁ nd what is desired from 
another, rather than what is feared.” See Morton Deutsch,  The Resolution of Con ﬂ ict: Constructive 
and Destructive Processes (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1973), esp. 149 ff. 
100
A.J. Steinbock
 When we hear third person remarks like “You trust  that person? That’s just 
stupid” or “You’re really naïve!” the presumption is that we could have prevented 
the trust by being more critical. The attempt not to be gullible is the spurious attempt 
to mitigate the vulnerable aspect of trust and to make another merely reliable. Yet, 
if I try not to be vulnerable (or gullible, under the guise of not being naïve, say, by 
trying to  ﬁ gure out all angles in advance, the other’s self-interests, and so forth), 
I will never trust. Contrary to Hardin, it is impossible to start trusting by being 
“skeptical.” 21 To be more precise, we have to distinguish between the epistemic 
character of gullibility as a readiness to believe (and skepticism as an unreadiness 
to believe 22 ), and the moral character of vulnerability in trusting through which 
I dispose myself and am bound to another. 
 To look only for what will in advance stop me from being vulnerable is to try to 
discern what is not loving in others, ultimately, to discern what is evil in others—for 
trusting is most deeply an openness to the person as loving—that which reveals 
“person” as such. Trusting by its nature cannot seek the “negative.” 23 When I trust, 
I do not essentially experience the possibility of betrayal. To do so would already be 
to hedge my trust and hence not to trust at all. When I trust, I dispose myself to 
another “completely” or “fully,” even though he might betray me or mislead me, 
intentionally or unintentionally. If I am worried that I might be betrayed, I will not 
trust. 24 Although we might  ﬁ nd ourselves saying such things, it violates the sense of 
trust to say something like: “Ok, I trust you, but don’t let me down!” or “I will give 
you a second chance, but don’t blow it.” This might be an understandable defensive 
reaction, but it would not be trust. 
 The reason so much of the contemporary literature on trust points to the dialectical 
interplay of trust and “anti-trust,” as Annette Baier has put it, 25 is because there is an 
implicit con ﬂ ation between trust and the ruling out of mistrust. When there is a 
con ﬂ ation of the two, one argues that the only way one can trust another is to rule 
out mistrust, namely, to secure oneself against mistrust. Logically, it may be the 
case that two negatives are a positive, but experientially, we cannot make the same 
claim. Empirically speaking, we could never make such a leap to a trust, because 
there would always be more concern, more probable deceptions, suspicions, etc., 
around the corner. One cannot trust via a negation of mistrust because these are a 
priori phenomenologically distinct movements, occurring on different levels of 
personal existence. Trust is an integral dimension of comportment. Accordingly, 
 21  Russell Hardin, “Trustworthiness,”  Ethics 107, No. 1 (1996): 26–42. 
 22  Hence, skepticism unfolds on a different level of experience than does mistrust. 
 23  Accordingly, I disagree with Hamrick’s contention that “trust must be conjugated with suspicion.” 
William S. Hamrick,  Kindness and the Good Society: Connections of the Heart (New York: SUNY 
Press, 2002), esp. 240.  
 24  We can think here of the related phenomenon of forgiveness: “If you do this again, I will not be 
your friend … I will leave you, etc.” This is essentially contradictory and vitiates the experience of 
forgiveness. 
 25  Annette Baier, “Trust and Anti-Trust,”  Ethics , 96, No. 2 (1986): 231–60. 
101
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
one cannot trust through a concern about being betrayed. One cannot remove the 
component of vulnerability, essential to trust, in order then to trust. 
 The trusting person inhabits a different “world” than the mistrustful person, the 
distrustful person, and the suspicious person. 26 When the dancer is launching herself 
into the arms of another, she is not simultaneously anticipating a betrayal. It is all 
the more evident here how trusting is a resting in, a relaxing into, and even an intimacy 
and a being supported by another. Certainly, we might greet another with suspicion, 
we might be cautious, tentative, etc., but then we are simply not describing the trust 
experience. 
 Rather than the possibility of betrayal being essential to trust, it is  vulnerability 
that is essential to trust,  ﬁ rst because we dispose ourselves or give ourselves over to 
another and are bound to the open destiny of another in trust as proffering, and second, 
because the other person is never within our grasp, is not “knowable” in Levinas’s 
sense, is not “objecti ﬁ able” in Scheler’s sense. This goes to the self-revelatory char-
acter of persons which is fundamentally “improvisational.” But my task here is not 
to decide when someone should or should not trust from a third-person, objective 
perspective, but to discern the meaning-orientation of trusting in the sphere of the 
emotional life of the person. 
 In being bound to another in this act, we become precisely vulnerable. In so 
doing, we prepare the  ﬁ eld of social existence. I mentioned above that trust is reve-
latory of intersubjectivity and the moral sphere, opening up a social space. One can 
see this perhaps even more clearly in the opposite example of someone who is 
constantly suspicious of others, who tries not to be susceptible to betrayal, or seeks 
negative possibilities in others as a way of forestalling vulnerability. Rather than 
being expansive, this movement contracts, isolates, and in general retracts from the 
social sphere. 
 It is equally mistaken to believe that we “decide” to trust. 27 We do not trust on the 
basis of a judgment; we do not test reality for the presence or absence of trustworthi-
ness. 28 True, we do make poor judgments, take unnecessary risks, and make risk 
assessments. But all this already comes too late where trust is concerned. In this 
respect, I concur with Lahno that trusting is qualitatively different from rational 
belief and calculation, and that our experience of trusting is not met in terms of 
minimizing risk. 29 
 Certainly, this is not to say that one should not be critical. My point is only that 
being critical is not a moral act and does not occur on the same level as trusting. 
After the fact, I could re ﬂ ect on a situation and say I was naïve, but this would be 
something added on to the trust experience. To trust is to be vulnerable; to make a 
 26  See also Isaacs, et al., “Faith, Trust and Gullibility,” esp. 462. 
 27  R. Holton, “Deciding to Trust, Coming to Believe,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72, 
No. 1 March (1994), 63–76. 
 28  As Isaac, et al., contend, “Faith, Trust and Gullibility,” 465. 
 29  See Bernd Lahno, “On the Emotional Character of Trust,”  Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 4 
(2001): 171–89. 
102
A.J. Steinbock
decision is to open oneself to wrongness or naïveté. Making a so-called decision to 
trust really means deciding no longer to decide; and this ultimately entails allowing 
myself to coincide with the social movement of existence by being bound to another. 
Put differently, making a decision to trust would already presuppose a trust which 
nulli ﬁ ed the necessity of making a decision about it in the  ﬁ rst place. Although 
I become vulnerable in a trust act, the fact that I am vulnerable is not the overriding 
issue. If it were, I would never arrive at trusting; I would be concerned with being 
vulnerable. Instead, I trust. The vulnerable aspect, which is always already present 
in the trusting, becomes especially pronounced or exposed in a betrayal. 
 Critical Assessment 
 Drawing on this example of an act peculiar to the emotional sphere, it is possible to 
make the following evaluations regarding its status as a founded act. Let’s begin 
with some differences between trust and its relation to epistemic acts, broadly 
construed. 
 First, unlike a straightforward perception and judicative acts, as well as reliability 
as a matter of practical functionality, trust is not essentially motivated by a past. 
While reliability could easily be viewed as “built-up” from lower level intentional 
formations, trust exhibits a different temporal structure already with respect to its 
dependence upon the past. This is not to say that the past cannot play a role (e.g., 
when the “familiar” is considered in genetic and generative contexts), but essen-
tially the past is not a constitutive moment since trust in a complete and unknown 
stranger is still a possibility. 
 Second, and on a related note, the “trusted” does not share the structure of an 
object, nor is the trusted “intended” like an object. Trust operates on a wholly 
different order of givenness because here the trusted is given in its otherness as 
“free,” as “mystery,” and as non-objecti ﬁ able in principle. Most deeply, trust concerns 
the level of the person, and as such it has its own kind of evidence, “modalization,” 
disappointment, etc. Moreover, I cannot make the “trusted” as such available to 
intersubjective/objective adjudication like I could an object, and I cannot make my 
trusting open to scrutiny like I might my intentions in a contract. 
 This is why, third, it is vulnerability that is essential to trust, and that makes us 
susceptible not to a mistake, but to betrayal. We experience a betrayal, personally, 
as worse than a mistaken assumption because—unless we are speaking loosely—to 
be wrong vis-à-vis an assumption is not the same as being betrayed vis-à-vis a trust. 
To trust a person as a good human being and to assume a person to be a good human 
being are two qualitatively different experiences. When we expose ourselves to 
“more” than what can be given in and through being-bound to another in trust, we 
become vulnerable and susceptible to betrayal. This has an entirely different structure 
from a disappointed judgment or being naïve or gullible, and is not a higher order 
variation of the latter. Accordingly, there is nothing to strip away from vulnerability 
to disclose a more putatively basic “naiveté.” This is why,  ﬁ nally, I do not originally 
103
6 The Distinctive Structure of the Emotions
“decide” to trust. Trust is not founded in a volitional act. To decide putatively to 
trust would be to regard the person pragmatically as merely reliable, and mistakenly 
take this for a (qualitatively different) trust experience. 
 Fourth, being bound to another in trusting another is an intersubjective structure 
that is qualitatively different from intending another person, either as an object, or 
apperceptively as in “empathy” ( Einfühlung ). I am already ahead of myself in this 
being-bound to. So even though I can expect without a trust, but not trust without an 
expectation, being-bound to another in “proffering” is itself a unique structure of 
intersubjective temporalization and is qualitatively distinct from the temporal struc-
ture in which the time constitution of objects unfolds. 
 Let me be clear. Even though we might claim that our systems of knowledge are 
based on trust, since we only believe what someone says because we trust him or her, 
this is not the same thing as saying ( inversely  from what we have been investigating) 
that belief is founded in trust. The question for me is not if genetically speaking 
attraction or repulsion—or the affective tonality of an experience—precedes the 
givenness of an object as, say, round, red, or black. Husserl’s analyses of passive 
synthesis, the affective givenness of the object, etc., already point in this direction. 30 
Furthermore, Max Scheler’s analyses of an affective milieu (for instance, the fact that 
we can notice the change in the room without even being able to identify explicitly 
that e.g., a painting is missing), also demonstrates this. Also unproblematic is the 
contention that the “order of the heart,” expressed as who and what we love, guides 
 what  might be perceived or become prominent for us. 31  At issue here is whether the 
acts of the emotional life are original ways of giving, and if the emotional act in every 
instance must be founded upon the epistemic act:sense correlation in order for there 
to be a “presence” (let’s not say “object”) in the mode of a “giving.”  
 Concluding Remarks 
 I would like to draw the following conclusion from the preceding description of 
trust, and the analysis of it in terms of its possible founded structure. Certain 
emotional experiences, like the one that was treated here, but by extension, those 
that pertain to the interpersonal sphere and to the givenness of the person, should 
not be understood as founded in objectivating acts. While this does not go against 
the basic structure of “founding” in Husserl, it does run against the bias of Husserl’s 
early assessment of the emotions. 
 It was considerations like these, though certainly in a more rich and systematic 
manner, that lead phenomenologists like Max Scheler to regard the emotional 
sphere as having an integrity all its own, with its own cognitive style, without 
 30  Husserl,  Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis . 
 31  Anthony J. Steinbock, “Interpersonal Attention through Exemplarity,”  Journal of Consciousness 
Studies: Beyond Ourselves , ed. Evan Thompson (2001), 179–196. 
104
A.J. Steinbock
reducing it either to a kind of rationalism or to mere “subjective feeling” or 
instinct. 32 In a similar vein, Emmanuel Levinas could describe the mystery of the 
“enigma” in a way that was not the revamping of the plus ultra of the “noema.” 33 In 
sum, these and other phenomenological considerations should lead phenomenology 
to distinguish and to describe unique modes of givenness where the emotional 
sphere is concerned.      
 32  See for example, Max Scheler, “Ordo Amoris,”  Schriften aus dem Nachlaß . Vol. 1. Gesammelte 
Werke, Vol. 10, ed. Maria Scheler (Bern: Francke, 1957), 345–376. See also Anthony J. Steinbock, 
 Phenomenology and Mysticism: The Verticality of Religious Experience (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 2007). 
 33  See Emmanuel Levinas’s earlier contributions for example, in  En découvrant l’existence avec 
Husserl et Heidegger (Paris: J. Vrin, 1988). 
105
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_7, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Here I explore the deeper meaning of Edmund Husserl’s breakthrough discussion of 
the “natural attitude” ( die natürliche Einstellung ) in  Ideen I (1913) 1 in relation to his 
evolving conception of the surrounding world or “life-world” ( Lebenswelt ), 2 a term 
that emerges in his writings around 1917 (e.g., in Supplements XII and XIII to  Ideen 
II 3 ) and becomes perhaps the most prominent theme of the  Krisis der europäischen 
Wissenschaften (1936 and 1954). 4 I contend that the parallels between the “natural 
surrounding world” ( natürliche Umwelt ) of  Ideen I and the “life-world” of the  Krisis 
have not been suf ﬁ ciently explored by commentators. 
 D.  Moran (*)
 School of Philosophy ,  University College ,  Dublin ,  Ireland 
e-mail:  dermot.moran@ucd.ie 
 Chapter 7 
 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
 Dermot  Moran   
 1  E. Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie . Erstes 
Buch : Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie 1, ed. K. Schuhmann, Hua III/1 (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977); trans. F. Kersten,  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and 
to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book . (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1983). Hereafter “ IdeasI ” 
followed by the page number of the English translation and the Husserliana (abbreviated to “Hua”) 
volume and page number. Schuhmann’s edition includes comments and corrections added by 
Husserl in his four different personal copies of the text. 
 2  See Rudiger Welter,  Der Begriff der Lebenswelt: Theorien vortheoretischer Erfahrungswelt 
(Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1986). 
 3  See E. Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie . 
Zweites Buch:  Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur Konstitution , ed. Marly Biemel, Hua IV 
(The Hague: Nijhoff, 1952); trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer as  Ideas pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book , Husserl Collected Works 
III (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989). Hereafter “ Ideas II ” followed by the page number of the English 
translation and the Husserliana volume and page number. 
 4  The German edition is E. Husserl,  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die tran-
szendentale Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie , ed. Walter 
Biemel, Husserliana (hereafter “Hua”) Volume VI (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1954). This edition 
includes the published parts of the  Krisis as well as a selection of associated documents. 
106
D. Moran
 I also want to mention the philosophical context that conditioned Husserl’s contrast 
between the natural surrounding world and the world of science. Husserl’s exploration 
of the experience of the natural world in the 1920s more or less coincides with the 
advocacy by the Logical Positivists of the Vienna School 5 of a “scienti ﬁ c conception 
of the world” ( eine wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung ), articulated in their Manifesto 
of 1929. 6  The Positivists advocated a scienti ﬁ c conception of the world to correct—or 
even replace—the naïve, natural, pre-scienti ﬁ c approach to the world and thereby to 
set philosophy and the other human sciences on the road to rigorous science. 7 Husserl’s 
alternative, already in  Ideen I , wants, on the other hand, to  re-situate the scienti ﬁ c 
conception of the world  within  the life-world and show how the idealizing scienti ﬁ c 
attitude requires and cannot replace the natural attitude. 
 Husserl offers a devastating analysis of the problems imposed by a narrow promotion 
of the natural scienti ﬁ c outlook in all areas of life. From “Philosophie als strenge 
Wissenschaft” (1910/1911) 8 to the  Krisis , he builds a critique of  naturalism and 
 objectivism and defends the need for a rigorous transcendental science to replace the 
failed objective science of subjectivity that modern psychology purported to be. 
 In his later years, Husserl often re ﬂ ected on and offered interpretations of his ear-
lier efforts. Thus, in a very late text from summer 1937 entitled “Zur Kritik an den 
 Ideen I ” (Towards a Critique of the  Ideen ) 9 —perhaps the last text he ever wrote before 
It is substantially translated by David Carr as  The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental 
Phenomenology. An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
U. P., 1970), although some supplements have been left out of the Carr edition. Hereafter the  Crisis 
of European Sciences will be cited as “ Krisis ” followed by the page number of the English transla-
tion (where available) and the Husserliana volume and page number. 
 5  On the complex history of the Vienna Circle, logical positivism and logical empiricism, see 
Thomas Uebel, “On the Austrian Roots of Logical Empiricism: The Case of the First Vienna 
Circle,”  Logical Empiricism: Historical and Contemporary Perspective s, eds. Paulo Parrini  et al . 
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2003) and Alan Richardson and Thomas Uebel, 
eds.  The Cambridge Companion to Logical Empiricism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2007). See also Friedrich Stadler, ed.,  The Vienna Circle and Logical Empiricism: Re-evaluation 
and Future Perspectives (Dordrecht: Springer, 2004) and idem,  The Vienna Circle—Studies in the 
Origins, Development, and In ﬂ uence of Logical Empiricism (Vienna: Springer, 2001). For Husserl’s 
relationship with positivism, see Manfred Summer,  Husserl und der frühe Positivismus (Frankfurt: 
Klostermann, 1985). 
 6  See  Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung. Der Wiener Kreis (1929); trans. “The Scienti ﬁ c Conception 
of the World. The Vienna Circle,”  The Emergence of Logical Empiricism: from 1900 to the Vienna 
Circle , ed. Sahotra Sarkar (New York: Garland Publishing, 1996), 321–40. 
 7  Between 1928 and 1937, the very period in which Husserl was developing his views on the 
 Lebenswelt , the Vienna Circle published ten books in a collection named  Schriften zur wissen-
schaftlichen Weltauffassung ( Monographs on the Scienti ﬁ c World-Conception ), eds. Moritz Schlick 
and Philipp Frank. These works have now been translated in the series  Uni ﬁ ed Science: The Vienna 
Circle Monograph Series Originally Edited by Otto Neurath (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1987). 
 8  E. Husserl, “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft,”  Aufsätze und Vorträge (1911–1921) , Hua 
XXV 3–62, trans. Marcus Brainard, “Philosophy as Rigorous Science,”  The New Yearbook for 
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy Vol. II (2002): 249–95. 
 9  E. Husserl,  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. 
Ergänzungsband. Texte aus dem Nachlaß 1934–1937 , ed. Reinhold N. Smid, Husserliana Vol. 
XXIX (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992). 
107
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
he fell ill—Husserl writes of devising various ways into transcendental phenomenology 
and characterizes the way in  Ideen I as leading in “a single leap” ( in einem Sprunge , 
Hua XXIX, 425) to a new form of experiencing. He also says that  Ideen I provided a 
way from “the natural concept of the world” ( natürlicher Weltbegriff , Hua XXIX, 425) 
which he characterizes as “the ‘concept’ of the world of the ‘natural attitude’” and 
parses as “the pre- and extra-scienti ﬁ c life-world or the world that, correspondingly, 
has always been and always will be, in all of our natural practical life-interests, the 
standing  ﬁ eld ( das ständige Feld ) of our interests, our goals, our actions” (Hua 
XXIX, 425). He acknowledges further that this natural conception of the world was 
sketched “only in the roughest outlines” ( nur in rohesten Zügen ) in  Ideen I . The 
systematic analysis and description of this “Heraclitean-moving world” presents a 
great and dif ﬁ cult problem. Finally, he writes that the reduction to the life-world 
restores the sense of history missing from the Cartesian way:
 We shall see that the life-world (considered omnitemporally) is nothing other than the historical 
world. From this, we can see that a complete systematic introduction to phenomenology is 
initiated and carried through by a universal historical problem. If one introduces the  epoch   
without the thematic of history, then the problem of the life-world, that is to say, the problem 
of universal history, will be entirely left out. The way introduced in  Ideen I has its legitimacy, 
but now I maintain that the historical way ( den historischen Weg ) is more primary ( prinzip-
ieller ) and more systematic. (Hua XXIX, 425–26, my translation)  
 This is an extraordinary admission. Husserl effectively admits that what he had 
uncovered in  Ideen I , i.e., the natural concept of the world, would become clari ﬁ ed 
in his later analysis of the life-world as a  historical concept. This “historical” way 
into phenomenology, moreover, is actually more primordial and all inclusive than 
the “Cartesian way”! 10 Husserl’s various ways to the reduction are well known, 
although there is dispute about their nature, number and interrelatedness, 11 but it is 
unusual to speak of a “historical reduction.” Husserl’s own students (Ludwig 
Landgrebe, 12 Alfred Schutz, and Aron Gurwitsch) read the  Krisis as representing a 
novel point of departure with its interest in history and the life-world as an attempt 
to rebalance the Cartesian presentation of transcendental phenomenology, explicated 
 10  I am grateful to LAU Kwok-Ying for his article “History and the Phenomenological Reduction in the 
Last Husserl,” presented at the Fourth OPO meeting,  Razón y vida , Segovia, Spain, 19–23 Sept 2011. 
 11  See for instance Iso Kern, “Die drei Wege zur transzendental-phänomenologischen Reduktion 
in derPhilosophie Edmund Husserls,”  Tijdschrift voor Filoso ﬁ e, XXV (1962): 303–49; trans. as 
“The Three Ways to the Transcendental Phenomenological Reduction in the Philosophy of 
Edmund Husserl,”  Husserl. Expositions and Appraisals , eds. F. Elliston and P. McCormick (South 
Bend, IN: U. of Notre Dame Press, 1977), 126–49; and Iso Kern, “The Phenomenological or 
Transcendental  epoch  and Reduction,”  An Introduction to Husserlian Phenomenology , eds. 
R. Bernet, R. Kern, and E. Marbach (Evanston, IL: Northwestern U. P., 1993), 58–77. See also 
John Drummond, “Husserl on the Ways to the Phenomenological Reduction,” Man and World 8 
No. 1 (February 1975): 47–69. Both Kern and Drummond agree in seeing  IdeasI as primarily 
promoting the Cartesian way.  
 12  See, for instance, L. Landgrebe, “The World as a Phenomenological Problem,”  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 1/1 (Sept. 1940): 38–58; and Ludwig Landgrebe, “Husserls 
Phänomenologie und die Motive zu ihrer Umbildung,”  Revue internationale de Philosophie I/2, 
(Brussels, 1939). 
108
D. Moran
in  Ideen I ,  Cartesianische Meditationen 13 and reaf ﬁ rmed in the “ Nachwort zu 
meinen ‘Ideen’ ” (published in 1930 in the  Jahrbuch and in English in Boyce 
Gibson’s 1931 translation of the  Ideen ). 14 
 Thus Landgrebe connects Husserl’s interest in the life-world with the manner in 
which space and time are experienced by the embodied person. In this connection 
Husserl had written in 1934 a fragment “ Umsturz der kopernikanischen Lehre in der 
gewöhnlichen weltanschaulichen Interpretation. Die Ur-Arche Erde bewegt sich 
nicht” that connected the life-world with the world as experienced prior to science. 15 
Landgrebe writes: “Thus, in explicating immediate experience, the experience of 
our world as a ‘life-world,’ Husserl effects a reversal of the ‘Copernican Revolution,’ 
by the insight that every experience necessarily presupposes an ultimate unmoved 
basis, which is not itself objectivated. For ‘us men,’ this basis is ‘our earth’—as an 
actual exempli ﬁ cation of an essential necessity.” 16 
 Commentators are not wrong to see as new in the  Krisis the themes of life-world 
and history. Husserl himself, however, believed he had been moving in this broadly 
historical direction since  Ideen I ; indeed, there are undoubtedly tentative discus-
sions in that work that anticipate the later explicit discussion (e.g., in the portrayal 
of phenomenology as a “science of origins” in  Ideen I, §56). 
 In many later texts, Husserl regarded the Cartesian way into phenomenology as 
“one-sided” and de ﬁ cient and saw the way into transcendental phenomenology 
through the life-world (sometimes called “the ontological way”) as more “basic” or 
 13  E. Husserl,  Méditations cartésiennes: Introduction à la phénoménologie , trans. G. Peiffer and 
E. Levinas (Paris: Almand Colin, 1931). The German text was not published until 1950 as 
 Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge , ed. Stephan Strasser, Husserliana I (The 
Hague: Nijhoff, 1950); trans. D. Cairns as  Cartesian Meditations. An Introduction to Phenomenology 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1960). Hereafter “CM” followed by page number of English trans-
lation, and Husserliana volume and page number. 
 14  Husserl’s “Author’s Preface” was written in 1930 and was published in English translation in 
Boyce-Gibson’s translation of  Ideas I published in 1931, see E. Husserl, “Author’s Preface to the 
English Edition,”  Ideas. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology , trans. W. R. Boyce Gibson 
(New York: Collier Books, 1962), 5–22. Husserl’s German text is somewhat different, and was 
originally published in the  Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung, vol. XI 
(1930). It is reprinted as “ Nachwort, ” Hua V 138–62, and translated as “Epilogue” in  Ideas II , 
405–30. Husserl had originally planned both a Foreword and an Afterword to the volume to explain 
the signi ﬁ cance of  Ideen I . 
 15  Edmund Husserl,“ Umsturz der kopernikanischen Lehre in der gewöhnlichen weltanschaulichen 
Interpretation. Die Ur-ArcheErde bewegt sich nicht. Grundlegende Untersuchungen zum phänom-
enologischen  Ursprung der Körperlichkeit der Räumlichkeit der Natur im ersten naturwissen-
schaftlichen Sinne. Alles notwendige Anfangsuntersuchungen,”  Philosophical Essays in Memory 
of Edmund Husserl , ed. Marvin Farber (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1940), 307–25; 
trans. as “Foundational Investigations of the Phenomenological Origin of the Spatiality of Nature,” 
 Husserl. Shorter Works , trans. and eds. Frederick Elliston and Peter McCormick (Notre Dame: U. 
of Notre Dame Press, 1981), 222–33; revised by Len Lawlor in M. Merleau-Ponty,  Husserl at the 
Limits of Phenomenology , eds. L. Lawlor and B. Bergo (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 
2002), 117–31. 
 16  L. Landgrebe, “The World as a Phenomenological Problem,” trans. D. Cairns,  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 1/1 (Sept. 1940): 46. 
109
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
“primary” ( prinzipiell ) and more complete. Thus he contrasted the manner in which 
the phenomenological reduction is introduced, as mentioned, in “one leap” (a phrase 
repeated in the  Krisis, §43—in  Ideen I with the various ways to the reduction in 
later works including the  Krisis . According to  Ideen I , §56, it is precisely the 
natural world—including the physical, psychophysical, and cultural worlds—that 
must undergo “switching off” or “exclusion” ( Ausschaltung, Ideen I , §56, 131; Hua 
III/1, 122) in the reduction. In  Ideen I , as 2 years earlier in the  Grundprobleme der 
Phänomenologie (1910/1911) 17 —and indeed as in the 1907  Idee der Phänome-
nologie 18 — Husserl presents Descartes as the great originator of transcendental 
philosophy. Thus in the  Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie he writes: “The  ﬁ rst 
philosopher who achieved a phenomenological reduction was Descartes. However, 
he achieved it only to relinquish it immediately. It is a most noteworthy fact that the 
fundamental consideration that inaugurates the entire course of the development of 
modern philosophy was nothing other than the staging of the phenomenological 
reduction” (BPP, 41; Hua XIII, 150). 
 Husserl gradually became aware that the “Cartesian way” uncovered pure 
subjectivity but seemed to leave it without content, without connections to other 
subjects or to the world. The greatest danger of the Cartesian way is that it can invite 
a new consideration of consciousness precisely in the natural attitude and thus 
distorting its true essence. Hence, Husserl proposes a more “universal and radical 
 epoch  ” in  Erste Philosophie 1923/1924 (Hua VIII, 129), 19 for instance, which he 
thinks might uncover directly the transcendental spectator with its transcendental life 
(Hua VIII, 127). Only gradually, does Husserl come to realize that what one could 
call the “being-in-the-world-with-others” of the transcendental subject cannot be left 
to one side in the reduction. Husserl’s thinking about Kant, especially in his 1924 
Kant lecture, 20  led him to reconsider the problem of the givenness of the world. 
 Husserl’s students and followers (from Landgrebe, Schutz, Gurwitsch, Patočka, 
Fink and Merleau-Ponty to Gadamer and Habermas) all recognised that one of the 
novel features of the  Krisis is its account of the phenomenological reduction based 
 17  E. Husserl, “Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie,”  Zur Phänomenologieder Intersubjektivität. 
Texte aus dem Nachlass Erster Teil: 1905–1920, Husserliana XIII,ed. Iso Kern (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1973); trans. Ingo Farin and James G. Hart,  The Basic Problems of Phenomenology , 
Husserl Collected Works XII (Dordrecht: Springer, 2006). Hereafter “BPP” followed by English 
pagination and Husserliana volume and page number. 
 18  See E. Husserl,  Die Idee der Phänomenologie. Fünf Vorlesungen . Nachdruck der 2. ed. Au ﬂ age. 
Hrsg. W. Biemel, Husserliana II (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1973), trans. Lee Hardy as  The Idea of 
Phenomenology. Husserl Collected Works VIII (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999). Hereafter “IP” followed 
by page number of the English translation and the Husserliana volume and page number. 
 19  E. Husserl,  Erste Philosophie (1923/24). Erster Teil:  Kritische Ideengeschichte , ed. R. Boehm, 
Hua VII (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1965) and Zweiter Teil:  Theorie der phänomenologischen Reduktion , 
ed. R. Boehm, Hua VIII (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1965). An English translation is currently in prepa-
ration for the Husserl Collected Works series (Springer). 
 20  See E. Husserl, “Kant and the Idea of Transcendental Philosophy,” trans. Ted E. Klein and 
William E. Pohl,  Southwestern Journal of Philosophy 5 (Fall 1974): 9–56; original collected in 
 Erste Philosophie , Hua VII, 230–87. 
110
D. Moran
on the life-world (as Husserl makes clear in  Krisis, §43, where he explicitly invokes 
 Ideen I ) which is contrasted with the scienti ﬁ c world constructed on it. He writes:
 I note in passing that the much shorter way to the transcendental  epochē in my  Ideen toward 
a Pure Phenomenology andPhenomenological Philosophy,  which I call the “Cartesian way” 
(since it is thought of as being attained merely by re ﬂ ectively engrossing oneself in the 
Cartesian  epochē of the  Meditations while critically purifying it of Descartes’s prejudices and 
confusions), has a great shortcoming: while it leads to the transcendental ego in one leap 
( in einem Sprunge ), as it were, it brings this ego into view as apparently empty of content, 
since there can be no preparatory explication; so one is at a loss, at  ﬁ rst, to know what has been 
gained by it, much less how, starting with this, a completely new sort of fundamental science, 
decisive for philosophy, has been attained. Hence also, as the reception of my  Ideas showed, it 
is all too easy right at the very beginning to fall back into the naive-natural attitude—some-
thing that is very tempting in any case( Krisis , 155; Hua VI, 157–58)  
 Indeed, the long discussion of the “primordial foundation” ( Urstiftung ) of modern 
mathematical science with Galileo in  Krisis,  §9 is similarly seen by most commentators 
as a novel development of Husserl’s late years. A re-reading of  Ideen I , however, reveals 
that in 1913 he already recognizes the importance of the notion of the naturally-lived, 
naively-experienced, pregiven world (see especially  Ideen I , §§39, 40) and also presents 
a brief sketch of the Galilean picture of objectivity in the natural sciences. Husserl is 
already preoccupied with the relation between what he calls the “world of experience” 
( die Erfahrungswelt ) 21 and the scienti ﬁ c world, as his 1937 re ﬂ ection con ﬁ rms. Indeed, 
his view that  Ideen I  has its own “justi ﬁ cation” ( Recht,  Hua XXIX, 426) must now be 
situated within the exploration of the genesis of the historical world which is “more 
primary” ( prinzipieller ). 
 Ideen I is—like the  Logische Untersuchungen —“a patch-work” ( Stückwerk ), an 
Aladdin’s cave of phenomenological insights, supposedly presented in systematic 
form, although the progression of thought is not always obvious. I do not believe 
the greatness of the work lies in its introduction of the phenomenological  epochē , 
the reductions, the noetic-noematic correlation, and so on. Rather I maintain the 
extraordinary breakthrough is to be found in Husserl’s discovery of the  natural 
attitude  (albeit already mentioned in print in “Philosophie als strenge 
Wissenschaft” 22 ) and its correlate the natural world ( Ideen I, §47), themes which 
lead him to conceive of a new way of uncovering the presuppositions of the natural 
attitude and of mundane life in general. We shall concentrate hereafter only on the 
notion of the natural attitude. 
 21  The term “world of experience” ( Erfahrungswelt ) is frequently used by Husserl, see, for instance, 
 Ideen I , §46, Hua III/1, 96 and §48; III/1, 102. 
 22  Edmund Husserl, “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft,”  Logos. Internationale Zeitschrift für 
Philosophie und Kultur 1 (1910–1911), 289–341; reprinted in Edmund Husserl,  Aufsätze und 
Vorträge (1911–1921), mit ergänzendenTexten , eds. Thomas Nenon and Hans Reiner Sepp, 
Husserliana XXV (The Hague: Martinues Nijhoff, 1987); trans. M. Brainard, “Philosophy as 
Rigorous Science,”  New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy II 
(2002): 249–95. Hereafter “PRS” followed by page number of English translation and Husserliana 
volume and page number. 
111
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
 Ideen I , §27 introduces very abruptly, and in a sketchy but evocative outline, the 
notion of the “natural attitude” and of normal sciences as carried out in this attitude and 
in its theoretical complement (“the natural theoretical attitude,”  Ideen I, §1). 23  In this 
work, Husserl emphasizes the “worldly” ( weltlich , later he often uses the word 
 mundane ) 24 nature of the sciences of the natural attitude and their dogmatic nature, 
which must now be confronted by a critical turn, activated by an  epochē or “suspension,” 
which puts out of play all worldly “positings” ( Setzungen ) of consciousness (“the 
general thesis”) in order to grasp its very essence. The natural attitude is characterized 
as possessing a positing or thesis, something Paul Ricoeur questions, given the 
“profound” manner objects are present in our experience. 25  
 Husserl’s concept of the “natural attitude” ( die natürliche Einstellung ) is a major 
discovery. Furthermore, its correlate—“the natural surrounding world” ( die natürliche 
Umwelt ), which eventually evolved into the notion of the “life-world” ( Lebenswelt ) 
in Husserl’s Freiburg era—is equally signi ﬁ cant. 26 The term “natural attitude” 
emerges more or less alongside the  epochē in Husserl’s thinking, probably around 
1906/1907 in Göttingen (it is mentioned, for instance, in the  Idee der Phänomenologie , 
1907, §1, where it is characterized as a direct orientation towards things and not at 
all occupied with the critique of knowledge or the questions raised by scepticism, 
Hua II, 17). 27   The concept of the immediate subjective and intersubjective “surrounding 
world” ( Umwelt ) is given its  ﬁ rst  published characterization in  Ideen I, §§27–31. 
 In  Ideen I , a central characteristic of the natural attitude is its “general thesis” 
( Generalthesis ), or overall intentional presumption or belief that the world exists, is 
actual, is really there. All attitudes built on or related to the natural attitude are also 
permeated with this general conviction. In  Ideen I Husserl stresses that the particular 
sciences are involved in and supported by the natural attitude. The “exclusions” 
performed by the  epochē are designed not just to exclude our assumptions about the 
 23  Husserl’s concept of  the natural attitude ( die natürliche Einstellung ) includes the “pre-scienti ﬁ c” 
( Krisis , Hua VI 121, 152, 156) or “extra-scienti ﬁ c attitude,” the “natural theoretical attitude” ( Ideas 
I , §50, 113; Hua III/1 94), the “natural-naïve attitude” (“Nachwort,” Hua V 148), the attitude in 
which I live my “natural worldly life” ( natürliches Weltleben ,  Krisis, Hua VI 121, 152, 156), the 
“pregiven world of experience” ( die vorgebegene Erfahrungswelt ,  Krisis Hua VI 120). 
 24  In  Krisis Husserl employs both the adjectives “ weltlich ” (Hua VI 178,VI 180) and “ mundane ” 
(VI 208) to characterize life in the natural attitude. 
 25  A Key to Edmund Husserl’s Ideas I , trans. Bond Harris and J. Boucharfd Spurlock, ed. Pol 
Vandevelde (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1996). 
 26  Rudolf Bernet has denied that the life-world is to be understood as the correlate of the natural 
attitude but acknowledges that Husserl must have given rise to this impression since it is so widely 
believed. I can, however, document many places where Husserl identi ﬁ es the natural world of 
naïve experience with the life-world. See also Sebastian Luft, “Husserl’s Phenomenological 
Discovery of the Natural Attitude,”  Continental Philosophy Review (formerly  Man and World ) 31 
(1998): 153–70. 
 27  The term “natural attitude” does not occur in Husserl’s 1906/07 lectures, see Edmund Husserl , 
Einleitung in die Logik und Erkenntnistheorie. Vorlesungen 1906/07 , ed. Ullrich Melle, Hua XXIV 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1985). 
112
D. Moran
real world, or “nature” but also Husserl wants explicitly to exclude the natural sciences, 
both formal (mathematical physics) and experiential (biology), as well as cultural 
sciences ( Ideen I , §§56–60). According to the “Cartesian way” of  Ideen I , what 
remains after the exclusion and suspension of this general thesis is the immanent 
domain of “pure consciousness” with its  cogitationes and  cogitata . Already in 
 Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie Husserl makes clear that “[T]he correlate of 
the phenomenological perception is the  cogitatio in the Cartesian sense, for which 
we can say instead: the pure, in contradistinction to the empirical consciousness” 
(BPP, 41; Hua XIII, 150). By the  Krisis  Husserl had come to see the distortion 
introduced by this move. The performance of the reduction does not so much 
uncover “pure consciousness,” in this narrow sense, as reveal an intentionally 
constituted life-world of signi ﬁ cances, actions, and social intercourse in which the 
ego is at once embedded and contemplating. The problem is to articulate this 
movement from the natural world to the disclosing of the life-world without engaging 
in circular reasoning. 
 By contrast with the early emergence of the concept of the “natural attitude” and 
its correlated “surrounding world,” the concept of “life-world” did not take its 
precise form until after the publication of  Ideen I , probably around 1917. In  Ideen I , 
the concept of “world” is expressed largely through the concept of the “surrounding 
world” ( Umwelt ), e.g., in §§27 and 28, or “surrounding worlds” ( Umwelten ) in the 
plural: there is the “natural surrounding world” and there are “ideal worlds.” Husserl 
also invokes the “environment” ( Umgebung ) several times, meaning usually my 
immediate “surroundings” ( Ideen I,  §27), or, later, the “surroundings” of a perception 
( Ideen I, III/1, 257). 28 Much of the later discussion of  Umwelt focuses on its role as 
the background of thing-perception ( Dingwahrnehmung , see  Ideen I III/1, 101). 
 Ideen I , §53 deals with the nature of the world of real animals and other living 
things, but how does this relate to the material world and also to the world of abso-
lute subjectivity? Later, Husserl will call the familiar surrounding world the “home 
world” ( Heimwelt ) or “familiar world” ( Nahwelt , see  Krisis , 324; Hua VI, 303) and 
will broaden this concept of “world” until it becomes the central theme of his late 
re ﬂ ections. 
 An important discussion concerns the appropriate kind of  transcendence that can 
be said to belong to the natural world. In  Ideen I, §47, “The Natural World as a 
Correlate of Consciousness,” Husserl explicates the notion of  Umwelten more 
speci ﬁ cally to be the correlates of possible consciousness. The actual  Umwelt is one 
of many possible  Umwelten . He elaborates:
 28  Surprisingly only  Umgebung and not  Umwelt is listed in the index made by Gerda Walther to 
accompany  Ideen I .  Umgebung appears in  IdeasI , §27 with the sense of immediate surroundings. 
But it is invoked relative to the “intersubjective” world we share with other “I-subjects” ( Ichsubjekte ) 
in  Ideen I, §29 ( die intersubjektive natürliche Umwelt, III/1 60). Avenarius speaks of humans 
belonging to an  Umgebung  that includes other humans. Husserl often uses the word “ Umgebung ” 
to refer to the habitats of humans and animals (cf.  Krisis , Hua VI, 354). 
113
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
 But if the kinds of mental processes included under experience, and especially the fundamental 
mental process of perceiving physical things, can be submitted by us to an  eidetic consider-
ation, and if we can discern essential possibilities and necessities in them (as we obviously can) 
and can therefore eidetically trace the essentially possible variants of motivated experiential 
concatenations: then the result is the correlate of our factual experience, called  “the actual 
world,”  as  one special case among a multitude of possible worlds and surrounding worlds  
which, for their part, are nothing else but the  correlates of essentially possible variants of the 
idea, “an experiencing consciousness,” with more or less orderly concatenations of experience. 
As a consequence, one must not let oneself be deceived by speaking of the physical thing as 
transcending consciousness or as “existing in itself.” The genuine concept of the transcendence 
of something physical which is the measure of the rationality of any statements about 
transcendence can itself be derived only from the proper essential contents of perception or 
from those concatenations of de ﬁ nite kinds which we call demonstrative experience. The idea 
of such transcendence is therefore the eidetic correlate of the pure idea of this demonstrative 
experience. ( Ideen I , §47, 106; III/1, 100–101)  
 This might be said to articulate the absolutely central tenet of Husserl’s  transcendental 
idealism. Indeed, the exclusion of every transcendence regarding consciousness is 
precisely what Husserl calls “transcendental phenomenology” in  Ideen I , §86. 
 In the  Krisis  Husserl continues to use more or less the same language as in  Ideen I . 
In his 1931  Nachwort he indeed af ﬁ rms that  Ideen I is an essential if incomplete 
articulation of his transcendental idealism. What is interesting is that the notion of 
life-world does not just replace the notion of the natural world (as correlate of the 
natural attitude) but is also revealed as a transcendental-phenomenological conception. 
In other words, the transcendental-phenomenological  epochē and reduction themselves 
reveal the life-world as the inescapable and unsurpassable ground of all experience. 
Husserl has shifted from a natural to a transcendental conception of “worldhood” or 
“worldliness” ( Weltlichkeit ,  Krisis , 188; Hua VI, 192—the term does not appear in 
 Ideen I ) involves—a term he uses although it is more usually associated with 
Heidegger, and which appears in the third draft of the  Encyclopedia Britannica 
article, Hua IX, 274. 29 Generally speaking, Husserl continues to use  Umwelt broadly 
to mean my overall surrounding world in contrast with  Umgebung which he used 
for my immediate surroundings, my immediate context. But in the  Cartesianische 
Meditationen (where it appears four times, including  Lebensumwelt ) and in the 
 Krisis he makes deliberate use of a new term  Lebenswelt . 
 Although Husserl is closely associated with the term  Lebenswelt , the term did 
not originate with him, but can be found in a number of contemporary writers such 
as Hugo von Hofmannsthal, Georg Simmel, 30 Rudolf Eucken, among others, all of 
whom used the term in the  ﬁ rst decade of the twentieth century. The term is already 
 29  It would be interesting to compare Husserl’s and Heidegger’s conception of “worldliness” or 
“worldhood” ( Weltlichkeit ). See Martin Heidegger,  Sein und Zeit (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1993); 
trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson,  Being and Time (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), §14. 
 30  Georg Simmel,  Die Religion  (Frankfurt, 1912), 13. See Andreas Brenner, “Gibt es eine Ethik der 
Lebenswelt,”  Phenomenology of Life from the Animal Soul to the Human Mind ,  Analecta Husserliana 
XCIII, ed. Anna-Teresa Tymienecka (2007), 253–67. See also Christian Bermes, Welt als Thema der 
Philosophie: vom metaphysischen zum natürlichen Weltbegriff (Meiner Verlag, 2004).  
114
D. Moran
listed in Grimme’s  German Dictionary of 1885 (according to Hua XXXIX, xlvi). 
Ernst Wolfgang Orth writes: “The earliest known occurrence is found, as far as I 
know, in Hugo von Hoffmansthal in 1907/1908 in his introduction to his Island 
Edition of ‘One Thousand and One Nights’ … Hoffmansthal speaks of poems that 
speak to us because they emerge from out of a life world that is ‘incomparable.’” 31 As 
we have noted, the term “ Lebenswelt ” does not appear in  Ideen I . Husserl does 
employ another similar term, “ Lebewelt ” —“the world of living creatures,” or 
“biosphere”—in the three published editions of  Ideen I (Hua III/1 115) in discus-
sion concerning paleontology, but, the editor of the Husserliana edition, Karl 
Schuhmann corrected this as  Lebewesen in his Husserliana edition, based on the 
occurrence of the word  Lebewesen in Husserl’s  Krisis in a similar context. I believe 
however that  Lebewelt is intentional and indeed the term “ Lebewelt ” (along with 
“ Landlebewelt ”) was in use among German-speaking natural scientists (e.g., the 
Austrian geologist, paleontologist and mountaineer Karl Diener 1862–1928), 32 at 
times to refer to the whole biological world of  ﬂ ora and fauna (both past and 
present)—the biosphere or ecosystem. 33 One should also mention a possible 
in ﬂ uencer of the biologist and semiotician Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944), an 
Estonian who became professor at Hamburg and established there an Institut für 
Umweltforschung and who published already in 1909 his  Umwelt und Innenwelt 
der Tiere, followed by  Streifzüge durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen 
(1934). 34 
 The term  Lebenswelt  ﬁ rst shows up in the draft manuscripts associated with 
 Ideen II and Martin Heidegger was already employing the term in his early Freiburg 
lecture series of 1919. Possibly the  ﬁ rst occurrence of the term in Husserl is in 
 31  Gerhard Preyer, Georg Peter, and Alexander Ul ﬁ g, eds.,  Protosoziologie im Kontext » Lebenswelt 
« und » System « in Philosophie und Soziologie (Frankfurt: Humanities, 2000), 29: Der früheste 
bekannte Beleg  ﬁ ndet sich meines Wissens 1907/08 bei Hugo von Hofmannsthal in seiner 
Einleitung zur Insel-Ausgabe von “Tausendundeine Nacht.” Fellmann (1983, 120) zitiert die Stelle 
(vgl. Hofmannsthal: Gesammelte Werke, Prosa II 1959, 276). Hofmannsthal spricht von Gedichten, 
die uns ansprechen, weil sie aus einer “Lebenswelt hervorstiegen,” die “unvergleichlich” ist. Georg 
Simmel (Goethe, Leipzig 1913, 152) charakterisiert Goethes Menschengestaltung im Meister mit 
der Fähigkeit, “durch ihre [der Menschen] Wechselwirkung eine Lebenswelt erwachsen zu lassen” 
(vgl. Fellmann 1983, 120). In fact earlier references can be found. The theologian Ernest Troelsch 
uses it to describe the “Christian  Lebenswelt. ” 
 32  See, for instance, Theodor Arldt,  Die Entwicklung Der Kontinente und ihrer Lebewelt: Ein 
Beitrag zur vergleichenden Erdgeschichte , Volume 1 (Leipzig, 1907). 
 33  Gerhard Preyer, Georg Peter, and Alexander Ul ﬁ g, eds.,  Protosoziologie im Kontext » Lebenswelt 
« und » System « in Philosophie und Soziologie , 29; 1910 wird der Terminus “ Lebewelt ” von Karl 
Diener (Paläontologie und Abstammungslehre, Leipzig 1910, S. 70) für vergangene und rezente 
Systeme von Floren und Faunen verwendet; er  ﬁ ndet in diesem Sinne – auch als “Landlebewelt” 
– Eingang in Hörbigers‚“Glacial-Kosmogonie” mit der berühmten Welteiszeitlehre (bearbeitet von 
Ph. Fauth, Kaiserslautern 1913, 382, 508). 
 34  Jakob von Uexküll,  Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere (Berlin: Springer, 1909) and  Streifzüge 
durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen. Ein Bilderbuch unsichtbarer Welten. (Berlin: J. 
Springer, 1934); trans. Joseph D. O’Neil,  A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans. with 
A Theory of Meaning  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011). I am grateful to 
Jean-Claude Gens for bringing von Uexküll to my attention. 
115
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
Beilage XIII of  Ideen II (Hua IV, 372–77), written c. 1918–1920. Here Husserl 
writes:
 The lifeworld is the natural world—in the attitude of natural life ( Einstellung des  natürlichen 
Dahinlebens ) we are living functioning subjects together in an open circle of other func-
tioning subjects. Everything objective about the lifeworld is subjective givenness, our 
possession ( Habe ), mine, the other’s, and everyone’s together. Subjects and possessions are 
not equal. The subjects  are , without quali ﬁ cation, what is not personal is surrounding world 
( Umwelt ), what is lived is lived experience of the surrounding world, and that holds also for 
what is seen and thought, etc. ( Ideen II , p. 385; Hua IV, 375) 35 
 Husserl writes in the same supplement that the worlds of the natural and the 
human sciences are correlative ( Ideen II , 384; IV, 374) rather than incompatible. 
There is no straightforward clash between these approaches towards the world. 
Rather two different “attitudes” ( Einstellungen ) are involved. 
 Interestingly, Husserl—and later Heidegger—regularly use the verbs (or verbal 
nouns)  dahinleben ,  hineinleben and  hineinhandeln to refer to life in the natural 
attitude. 36 The primary meaning of the life-world is, for Husserl, the “world of everyday 
experience” ( Alltagswelt ), the “intuitive” world ( die anschauliche Welt ), or the 
“pregiven” surrounding world ( Krisis , 47; VI, 47). In  Ideen I , §30, Husserl speaks of 
arriving at the “entrance gate of phenomenology” when one grasps the “quite univer-
sal characteristics of the natural attitude” ( Ideen I , 56; III/1, 520). The way of natural 
living in the world, follows the stream of one’s interests, capacities, habitualities, and 
so on. Husserl even speaks in  Krisis  §72 of the “subscienti ﬁ c everydayness of natural 
life” ( Krisis , 260; VI, 264), utilizing the term “everydayness” ( Alltäglichkeit ) more 
usually associated with Heidegger (see  Sein und Zeit, §52). 
 Both Husserl and Heidegger speaks about absorption in everyday life, 
 spontaneous absorbed “living along” ( Dahinleben , see SZ, 396; 345). Life in the 
natural attitude is life driven by interests. Depending on what one is interested in, 
the world manifests or displays itself in a particular manner. Natural living is spon-
taneous “living along” ( im natürlichen Dahinleben ,  Ideen I , 54; III/1, 50), just 
getting into it, throwing oneself into it, immersing oneself, literally “living into it” 
( hineinleben ) as it were. To live in the natural attitude is to live, as Husserl puts it, 
“naïvely,” “spontaneously,” unquestioningly, with “blinders” ( Scheuklappen ) on. 
Indeed, to break out of the natural attitude is like someone blind who has suddenly 
been enabled to see (Hua VIII, 122). 
 35  The German reads: “Die Lebenswelt ist die natürliche Welt—in der Einstellung des natürlichen 
Dahinlebens sind wir lebendig fungierende Subjekte in eins mit dem offenen Kreis anderer fungi-
erender Subjekte. Alles Objektive der Lebenswelt ist subjektive Gegebenheit, unsere Habe…” 
( Ideen II , Hua IV, 375). 
 36  The German verb “ hineinleben ” means literally “to live into,” “to immerse oneself into,” but it is used 
in colloquial German expressions to mean “to take each day as it comes” ( in der Tag hineinleben ). 
Similarly “ dahinleben ” has the colloquial sense of “to vegetate” or “to waste one’s life,” to while away 
one’s time in a less than fully committed manner. I am grateful to Julia Jansen for pointing out this 
somewhat negative in ﬂ ection to the term “ dahinleben. ” The verb “ hineinhandeln ” (literally “acting 
into”) is used by Husserl with regard to natural acting in the world at Hua VIII, 122.  
116
D. Moran
 It is a somewhat dif ﬁ cult question to chart the exact relationship between the 
natural attitude, the “naturalistic attitude” (discussed already in “Philosophie als 
strenge Wissenschaft” and  Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie ) and the outlook 
of  naturalism . All three are associated in Husserl’s account. In this regard 
Sebastian Luft has commented: “The natural attitude consists in viewing the world 
as ‘nature,’ hence as existing independent of an experiencing agent.” 37 But to see 
the physical, material world as really there, as present—which Husserl often 
characterizes as the main thrust of the natural attitude—is not enough. In  Ideen II, 
§11 (and elsewhere), Husserl speaks of the “natural-scienti ﬁ c attitude,” and of the 
correlate of the modern natural scienti ﬁ c attitude as “the idea of nature” ( Ideen II, 
§11). In this regard, he speaks of the  scienti ﬁ c  idea of nature as that of a closed 
domain of physical objects in the one space-time connected by laws of causation, 
whereas this “experienced world” also includes living things, animals, persons, 
social and cultural products, and so on. 
 Husserl becomes more focused on this issue in his later writings and on the 
connection between the natural, the naturalistic, and the personalistic attitudes. In 
 Ideen I , §54, Husserl speaks of the reduction as removing everything that is “personal” 
(interestingly in his D copy of  Ideen I  Husserl had crossed out “personal” and 
substituted “human,” see  Ideen I , 127 n. 95) from consciousness so we are left with 
a pure stream of experiences. According to this exercise, one can strip a lived-
experience of everything personal, everything psychological, egoic, and re ﬂ ect on it 
as a pure possibility of experiencing, as what he calls “the absolute mental process” 
( das absolute Erlebnis ,  Ideen I , 128; Hua III/1, 119). One cannot accept anything 
“personal” as anything but relative. Similarly, in  Ideen I , §60, Husserl speaks in the 
plural of “transcendencies” ( Transzendenzen ) such as physical thing, psychic thing, 
and person as having to be excluded. Yet, in  Ideen II , the personal world plays a 
major role. 
 In  Ideen II (perhaps, in part, under the editorial in ﬂ uence of Edith Stein, and 
indeed the challenge of Max Scheler), the personalistic attitude emerges very 
strongly and originally. In  Ideen II , in Supplement XIII (connected with Supplement 
XII and written sometime between the teens and the early 1920s, see the Editor’s 
comments at Hua IV, 423), Husserl emphasises that the life-world of  persons escapes 
natural science and has to be understood in its own “spiritual terms”: “The life-
world of persons escapes ( entschlüpft ) natural science, even though the latter inves-
tigates the totality of realities” ( Ideen II, 384; Hua IV, 374). 
 In  Ideen II,  Supplement XII, Husserl had stated that persons as psychophysical 
organisms are indeed part of nature and are encountered in nature in the natural 
attitude. The “investigator of the world” or natural scientist ( Weltforscher ) sees 
persons as physical entities in this sense. Embodied subjects are simply encountered 
as part of the pregiven world ( Ideen II , 363; IV, 352). Now, paradoxically, and going 
 37  See Sebastian Luft, “A New Look at Husserl’s Theory of the Phenomenological Reduction,” in 
 Anuario Filosó ﬁ co (Madrid), No. 36/1 (2004),  Intencionalidady Juicio en Husserl y en Heidegger , 
65–104, see 75. 
117
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
against the thought experiment in  Ideen I, persons are perceived—like physical 
objects—to be more than their “appearances” and to have an “in itself” which is 
absolute over and against appearances. Husserl is explicit:
 Things have a causal essence, absolutely, whether I experience it or not. They are, together 
with their determinations, without need of me. Subjects, too, have their mundane in-itself, 
and to a certain degree they have a “causal” essence, whether they know about it or not and 
whether I know about it or not. There exist, accordingly, psychophysical connections, 
whether or not they enter into the compass of actual intentionality. ( Ideen II , Supplement 
XII, 364; Hua VI, 353) 
 Husserl then considers the psychophysical understanding of human beings as 
natural beings embedded in a physical world as an entirely appropriate way of 
considering them. Human beings are  conditioned by physical, causal processes 
(what Husserl calls “psycho-physical conditionalities”) whether they know it or not. 
They belong to nature understood as the causally closed domain of space-time. 
Husserl is clear that, at one level, even the human sciences investigate humans as 
part of nature and that this nature has been discovered or revealed through the process 
of mathematization as in inaugurated by Galileo and modern natural science (see 
 Ideen II , 364; IV, 353, where he speaks of “mathematical naturalization”). But there 
are limits to that perfectly legitimate form of human science. There is another form 
of human science—operating in transcendental register—which sees human beings 
as self-conscious normative personal agents recognizing, cooperating and in con ﬂ ict 
with other self-conscious personal agents: “The human sciences are, essentially, 
personal sciences. They deal with persons in personal associations and with the 
personal surrounding world, which arises out of personal acts in personal motiva-
tions” ( Ideen II , 365; IV, 354). It is this latter sense of the person as free autonomous 
agent motivated by rational and irrational motives that escapes natural science. 
 Husserl contrasts the personalistic attitude with the naturalistic attitude in  Ideen 
II . Already in “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft,” all forms of  naturalism 
( Naturalismus ) or “naturalistic objectivism” are said to harbor an inbuilt “absurdity” 
or “countersense” ( Widersinn ), which he de ﬁ nes as an “evident inconsistency” 
(PRS, 254; Hua XXV, 9). This absurdity consists in the attempt to  naturalize 
consciousness: “What characterizes all forms of extreme and consistent naturalism, 
from popular materialism on down to the most recent sensation-monism and ener-
geticism, is, on the one hand, the  naturalization of consciousness , including all 
intentionally immanent givens of consciousness, and, on the other hand, the  natu-
ralization of Ideen , and thus of all absolute ideals and norms” (PRS, 254; XXV, 9). 
Already in this 1910/1911 essay, Husserl acknowledges the hold of naturalism on 
our intuitions: “It is not easy for us to overcome the primeval habit ( die urwüchsige 
Gewohnheit ) of living and thinking in the naturalistic attitude and thus of natural-
istically falsifying the psychical” (PRS, 271; Hua XXV, 31). The “spell of the natu-
ralistic attitude” and “primeval naturalism” prevents us from grasping the psychical 
as such and indeed, in general, from seeing essences. Naturalism misconstrues the 
essential nature of consciousness and indeed the nature of the eidetic in general. 
 In “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” Husserl shifts from talking about the 
 natural attitude to the  naturalistic attitude . In  Ideen II, §49 he elaborates on the 
118
D. Moran
distinction between the naturalistic attitude with the personalistic attitude. There has 
been considerable debate about the manner in which these attitudes coordinate or 
overlap. Possibly, then, these are two sub-divisions within the overarching natural 
attitude. While Husserl characterizes naturalism as at bottom countersensical, he 
does acknowledge one area where he thinks naturalism gets it right, namely, that it 
recognizes the necessary  embodiment  of consciousness: “The legitimate ‘natural-
ization’ of consciousness consists in the fact that [animate] body ( Leib ) and soul 
form a genuine experiential unity and that, in virtue of this unity, the psychic obtains 
its position in space and time” ( Ideen II , §46, 176; Hua IV, 168). Husserl under-
stands that the natural attitude approaches living things as psychophysical unities. 
 As the mature Husserl often insists, the natural attitude is, of course, an attitude 
that is, in its very naiveté, unknown to itself. The natural attitude is a kind of 
“primordial” ( urtümlich ) attitude (as Husserl puts it in his 1924 Kant lecture) that 
runs through every aspect of “worldly life” ( Weltleben —a term that becomes 
prominent for natural living in the  Krisis ). Husserl speaks of our natural living in the 
world from childhood on in  Erste Philosophie (Hua VIII § 45). 
 We know from  Ideen I, §31 that it takes a radical change or alteration of 
attention or interest to bring the natural attitude to light. To illuminate the natural 
attitude as such is itself to effect the  philosophical attitude (Hua II, 18). Thus, 
Husserl states that phenomenology is a science, but it is also “at the same time 
and above all a method and an attitude, the speci ﬁ cally  philosophical attitude of 
thought , the speci ﬁ cally  philosophical method ” (IP, 19; Hua II, 23). More 
precisely, the attitude that illuminates the natural attitude is the transcendental-
phenomenological attitude. In fact, in historical terms, it is the “breakthrough” 
of the “ancient Greek philosophers” (“a few Greek eccentrics” as he says in the 
Vienna Lecture,  Krisis , 276; Hua VI, 321). 
 In his mature work, Husserl has a particular interest in the description of the 
natural attitude itself; indeed in the  Krisis writings he speaks of a “science of the 
life-world” and an “ontology of the life-world” (see  Krisis, §51). Rochus Sowa 
dates this project of a science of the life-world (understood as a rethinking of Kant’s 
transcendental aesthetic, i.e., the analysis of the a priori framework of sensible 
experience) to the early twenties and sees it as Husserl’s response to the twin chal-
lenges of Avenarius and Dilthey (Hua XXXIX, xxvi). Sowa correctly locates 
Husserl’s thinking here in the  Ding und Raum lecture series (1907) where Husserl 
is discussing the constitution of the physical thing in perception. In  Ideen I , however, 
he is far more interested in the manner in which this attitude can be bracketed, 
suspended, interrupted, put under erasure to gain access to what he will call the 
“transcendental” attitude. 
 As is well known, from the beginning of his career, Husserl’s overall concern is 
with science and how science is possible. To make the question more precise, his 
question is: how is scienti ﬁ c objectivity or the objectivity of knowledge possible? 
His overall aim was to develop a well-grounded  Wissenschaftslehre , a theory of 
scienti ﬁ c knowledge. In order to make more precise the meaning of scienti ﬁ c objec-
tivity, quite early on, probably in his early years at Göttingen, Husserl introduces a 
crucial and permanent distinction between experiential objectivity in naïve 
119
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
 experiencing in the natural attitude and the speci ﬁ c kind of scienti ﬁ c objectivity that 
comes about through the adoption of the special “theoretical attitude” ( die theore-
tische Einstellung , mentioned right at the beginning of  Ideen I , §1, and described as 
the “natural theoretical attitude” at  Ideen I , §50, and discussed in more detail at 
 Ideen II, §3). The point is well made (and crucially important for the planned  Ideen 
III ) 38 that Husserl wanted to ground not just the natural sciences but also the  human 
sciences, but he is more interested in the relations between the natural and the theo-
retical attitudes. Husserl de ﬁ nes theoretical acts very broadly as  self-conscious acts 
of perceiving, judging, valuing, etc. “Again it is one thing to be conscious at all that 
the sky is blue, and it is another thing to live in the performance of the judgement 
(that the sky is now blue) in an attentive, explicitly grasping, speci ﬁ cally intentional 
( meinend ) way. Doxic lived experiences in this attitude, in this manner of explicit 
performance ( in dieser Weise des Vollzugs ) … we term theoretical acts” ( Ideen II, 
§3, 5; Hua IV, 3–4). 
 In the theoretical attitude (as described in  Ideen I and  II ) the ego is explicitly 
 attentive , engaged; it is in a genuine way “objectifying.” In this attitude, objects that 
will be explicitly thematized are also in a certain way laid out in advance. In  Ideen I , 
the natural attitude is introduced precisely as a theoretical attitude (see §1). Certainly, 
the theoretical attitude belongs with the natural attitude as something that can 
be adopted prior to and independent of the reduction. In  Ideen II,  Husserl explicitly 
distinguishes between straightforward acts of, for example, perception and affection, 
and theoretical acts:
 But we are no longer performing the seeing in this eminent sense when we see the radiant 
blue sky, live in the rapture of it. If we do that, then we are not in the theoretical or cognitive 
attitude but in the affective ( Gemütseinstellung ). On the other hand, though we have adopted 
the theoretical attitude, the pleasure may very well be present still, as, for example, in the 
observing physicist who is directing himself to the radiant blue sky, but then we are not 
living in the pleasure. There is an essential phenomenological modi ﬁ cation of the pleasure, 
and of the seeing and judging, according as we pass over from one attitude to another. This 
characteristic change of attitude ( Einstellungsänderung ) belongs, as an ideal possibility, 
to all acts … that is all acts which are not already theoretical at the outset allow of being 
converted into such acts by a change of attitude. ( Ideen II, §4, 10; IV, 8) 
 Theoretical acts achieve or constitute a new and higher level of objectivity, one 
divorced from practical involvements. What is objective becomes a theoretical 
object ( Ideen II , §4, 13; IV, 11). Furthermore, and this is crucial, Husserl distinguishes 
carefully between this transition from the practical attitude to the theoretical and the 
transition from straightforward experience to re ﬂ ection ( Ideen II , §6). 
 38  E. Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie . Drittes 
Buch:  Die Phänomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissenschaften , ed. Marly Biemel, Hua V 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952); trans. Ted E. Klein and W.E. Pohl,  Ideas pertaining to a 
Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Third Book . Husserl Collected 
Works I (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1980). Hereafter “ Ideas III ” followed by the page number of the 
English and the Husserliana volume and page number. 
120
D. Moran
 In the puri ﬁ ed theoretical attitude (the attitude that is predominant in modern 
natural science), feelings are dropped, one no longer experiences “houses, tables, 
streets or works of art” ( Ideen II, §11), but “merely material things” with their stratum 
of “spatio-temporal materiality.” The theoretical attitude is indifferent to the values 
of these things, but is not indifferent to the  value of knowledge of them. In  Ideen II 
Husserl sharply contrasts nature objects with everyday natural-attitude objects: “In 
ordinary life ( im gewöhnlichen Leben ) we have nothing whatever to do with nature-
objects ( Naturobjekten ). What we take as things are pictures, statues, gardens, 
houses, tables, clothes, tools, etc. They are value-objects ( Wertobjekte ) of various 
kinds, use-objects ( Gebrauchsobjekte ), practical objects. They are not objects which 
can be found in natural science.” ( Es sind keine naturwissenschaftlichen Objekte , 
 Ideen II, §11, 29; Hua IV, 27.) 
 The theoretical attitude as a speci ﬁ c mode of  natural re ﬂ ection is inexorably 
moving towards becoming the scienti ﬁ c attitude. Husserl speaks of a certain  epochē 
of interests and practical purposes already taking place in the theoretical attitude 
(and this even more so when the natural attitude is itself put in question, see  Krisis , 
138n; VI, 141). But Husserl is always insistent that natural re ﬂ ection does not have 
the resources on its own to take the transcendental turn. An  epochē is needed to 
effect an “unnatural” turn to transcendental re ﬂ ection (see  Erste Philosophie , Hua 
VIII, 121–22). Indeed, the phenomenologist must learn to adjust to the new world 
of constituting subjectivity, just as the “beginner in physics” has to learn to under-
stand the spatiotemporal realm in a manner that lets go of the child’s naïve attitude 
to the natural world (see Husserl’s analogy at Hua VIII, 123). Phenomenology has 
its own “world of experience” ( Erfahrungswelt , Hua VIII, 123) different from the 
natural world of experience of everyday life. The phenomenologist must leave 
behind his own  Weltkindschaft  (VIII, 123). Husserl writes: “In this manner the natural 
child, the child of the world, is transformed into the phenomenological child, the 
child in the realm of pure spirit” ( Erste Philosophie , VIII, 123). 39 
 Husserl is attempting to articulate a new insight, but is somewhat inhibited due 
to his retention of the metaphysically loaded terms “immanence” and “transcen-
dence.” 40 In this part of  Ideen I there are several different threads of argumentation 
conducted at the same time. On the one hand, Husserl is continuing his earlier critique 
(from the  Logische Untersuchungen— especially the Second Investigation) of all 
forms of  representationalism . He is speci ﬁ cally seeking the “clari ﬁ cation of a funda-
mental error” (§43); the “fundamental error” of modern philosophy being the 
assumption that perception does not reach the true thing in itself. The perceived 
thing, on this view, is just a place-holder for the thing in physics. 
 39  Husserl in this period speaks of the phenomenological reduction in religious terms as turning us 
into children in a new sense. He sometimes quotes Christian scripture—“unless we become as 
little children we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven,” cf. Hua VIII, 413–18. 
 40  In  Cartesianische Meditationen, §11, Husserl says that the concept of the “transcendent” has to 
be explored exclusively on its own terms. 
121
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
 Husserl has always been an opponent of the “sign” theory of perception. The thing 
is not a sign or cipher for something that lies hidden behind our experiences. As he 
writes: “Between perception, on the one hand, and depictive-symbolic objectivation, 
on the other hand, there is an unbridgeable essential difference” ( Ideen I § 43, 93; 
Hua III/1, 79). 
 In contrasting the experienced thing with the thing as a scienti ﬁ c construct, 
Husserl adverts to the “well known distinction between primary and secondary 
qualities” ( Ideen I,  §40, 84; Hua III/1, 71), which claims the true physical thing is 
the one determined by physics. Husserl writes:
 When physics determines the physical thing given exclusively by such concepts as atoms, 
ions, energies, and so forth, and as, in any case, space- ﬁ lling processes for which only 
characterizations are mathematical expressions, it means them as something transcendent 
to the whole physical thing-content standing there “in person.” As a consequence, it cannot 
mean the physical thing as something located in the natural space pertaining to the senses. 
In other words, the space of physics cannot be the space belonging to the world given “in 
person” in perception: if it were, then the Berkeleyan objection would also apply to it. 
( Ideen I, §40, 84–85; Hua III/1, 72) 
 What is the Berkeleyan objection that Husserl is invoking here? It is the claim 
that the so called “primary” properties are as subjective-relative and perspectival as 
the secondary qualities. Primary qualities are relative to a perceiver; there are no 
“properties-in-themselves.” The space of physics cannot be the space of lived expe-
rience. This is surely the lesson of the  Krisis and associated works, but here it is 
already explicitly stated in  Ideen I . Indeed, rather than being an innovation in  Krisis, 
§9, Husserl is interested in Galileo’s revolution in physics already in “Philosophie 
als strenge Wissenschaft,” where he writes: “For the knowledge of external nature 
the decisive step from naive to scienti ﬁ c experience, from vague everyday concepts 
to scienti ﬁ c concepts with full clarity, was  ﬁ rst made, as is well known, by Galileo” 
(PRS, 266; Hua XXV, 24). 
 What I want to stress here is the direct continuity, despite the gap of a quarter 
century, between  Ideen I and  Krisis in the analysis of the relation between natural 
and scienti ﬁ c experience of the world. In both  Krisis and in  Ideen I Husserl is strug-
gling with the contrast between the naturally lived, naively experienced world (the 
world of “perception” in Husserl’s broadened sense that became Merleau-Ponty’s) 
and the world as projected in the theories of the modern mathematical sciences. 
Husserl is constantly questioning how the formally constructed world of science has 
come to be substituted for the ordinary world of experience. In  Formale und tran-
szendentale Logik,  §96, 41 for instance, Husserl speaks of “higher questions concerning 
the constitution of what we may call a theoretical world” (FTL, 243; Hua XVII, 
 41  Edmund Husserl,  Formale und transzendentale Logik. Versuch einer Kritik der logischen 
Vernunft. Mit ergänzenden Texten , hrsg. Paul Janssen, Husserliana XVII (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1974); trans. Dorion Cairns,  Formal and Transcendental Logic (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1969). Hereafter “FTL” followed by English page number and Husserliana volume and 
page number. 
122
D. Moran
250), i.e., the world as formalized by the sciences. According to this “idealization,” 
there is a “world in itself” and “the idea of exact nature” ( Idee der exakten Natur , 
XVII, 250). This world in itself is precisely that which can never be experienced. 
 In  Krisis, Beilage XVII , written around 1936–1937, Husserl insists all sciences 
are founded on the life-world and remain within the life-world:
 Here is again something confusing: every practical world, every science, presupposes the 
life-world; as purposeful structures ( Zweckgebilde ) they are  contraste d with the life-world, 
which was always and continues to be “of its own accord ( von selbst ).” Yet, on the other 
hand, everything developing and developed by mankind (individually and in community) is 
itself a piece of the life-world ( ein Stück der Lebenswelt ): thus the contrast is suspended. 
( Krisis , 382–83; VI, 462) 
 Husserl says this is only confusing for scientists because the life-world is not 
their subject matter no matter how it remains the “foundation” of their research. 
Scienti ﬁ c worlds are literally “pieces” ( Stücke ) of the life-world which provides 
a “fundament” or “ground” ( Grund ,  Boden ), and indeed “sub-soil” ( Untergrund ). 
I note here in passing that part of Heidegger’s implicit critique of Husserl is that he 
did not have an adequate conception of grounding (in  Vom Wesen des Grundes —
submitted to Husserl’s seventieth-birthday  Festschrift ). 42 
 At the end of  Ideen I,  §151 Husserl returns to discuss the many levels or “strata” 
( Schichten ) involved in the transcendental constitution of the thing (a topic he had 
also explored in  Ding und Raum ) from the lower level of the “sensuous schema” to 
the highest stratum of the “substantial-causal physical thing” ( Ideen I, §151, 363; 
III/1, 316), a theme on which he will elaborate in  Ideen II . Interestingly Husserl 
speaks of the “intersubjectively identical physical thing” as being on one level down 
from the highest level. This intersubjective world is the correlate of the world under-
stood in  empathy ( Ideen I, §151, 363; III/1, 317). This identi ﬁ es a particular prob-
lematic—why is the physical-causal thing in nature the highest level—surely the 
intersubjectively agreed thing should be on the highest level? Husserl states “very 
dif ﬁ cult problems are attached to the  interwovenness  of different regions” ( Sehr 
schwierige Probleme haften an der Ver ﬂ ochtenheit der verschiedenen Regionen 
( Ideen I, §152; Hua III/1, 354)). He struggles to unite these different strata. At times—
especially in his later work—he talks as if the physical thing gains its objective status 
precisely from the intersubjective agreement (or “triangulation” as Donald Davidson 
calls it), but here he makes intersubjective agreement to be a level below that of the 
highest stratum of the “substantial-causal physical thing”! It is the perceptual encoun-
ter with the physical thing that forms our dominant conception of it. 
 Husserl spends a long time discussing the constitution of the idea of  nature and 
of the  natural thing ( Naturding ) as well as the idea of exact  causality in  Ideen II —
although the bare bones of the discussion can also be found in  Ideen I , §47 (just 
before the notorious discussion of the annihilation of the world). In  Ideen II he 
thinks that the scienti ﬁ c idea of a thing as not changing without a cause is not in fact 
in line with intuitive experience ( Ideen II, §16, 53; Hua IV, 49). Naïve experience 
 42  M. Heidegger,  Vom Wesen des Grundes ; trans. Terrence Malick,  The Essence of Reasons 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1969). 
123
7 From the Natural Attitude to the Life-World 
believes a thing  can change on its own and  ﬁ nds nothing incoherent in that idea. 
Husserl writes:
  It was the new science of nature which  ﬁ rst grasped this idea of a strict identity in the 
absolutely determined and unequivocal dependencies of causality (an idea that has to be 
set off from any empirical apprehension) and which developed the demands implicit in this 
idea, demands which determine essentially the course of the scienti ﬁ c investigation into 
nature. ( Ideen II, §16, 52; 49)  
 This statement could have been taken directly from the  Krisis where Husserl 
writes: “One can truly say that the idea of nature as a self-enclosed world of bodies 
( Körperwelt )  ﬁ rst emerges with Galileo” ( Krisis, §10, 60; VI, 61). 
 In  Ideen II, §16 Husserl states that modern mathematical natural science has 
prescribed the idea of nature as that which is governed by exact laws (especially 
causality) and that determines from then on what is even to be called a “natural 
thing.” In  Ideen III Husserl distinguishes between “the world of actually present 
experience, the actual, subjectively and intersubjectively intuitive world” and the 
“objective, non-intuitive world of determinate mathematical-physical predicates” 
( Ideen III , 56; Hua V, 65, translation modi ﬁ ed). 
 In one sense, the scienti ﬁ c apprehension of things builds seamlessly on the intuited 
experience. Certain apprehensions of science (e.g., that a thing is made of molecules 
and atoms) can also be justi ﬁ ed on the basis of everyday experience because the thing 
is grasped as a complex composed of parts. So, in a certain sense, the scienti ﬁ c 
conception of body or aspects of it, are founded on sensory perceptual experience of 
bodies (for which  rigid, impenetrable, extended bodies provide the criterion or the 
optimal case), but in another sense the scienti ﬁ c grid manifests and explores bodies 
in a way which is quite independent of and never supported by sensory experience. 
Husserl’s position, therefore, is not simply to contrast the naïve common-sense object 
with the scienti ﬁ c object. Modern philosophy since Descartes and Galileo had been 
attempting to explain natural phenomena, e.g., the rainbow, the rising and setting of 
the sun, in terms which challenged our natural conception of these things but were 
built on the observed phenomena. But there are other cases—and Kant of course also 
stresses this in opposition to Hume’s sceptical account of causation—where science 
applied a certain grid of lawfulness to nature and expects nature to respond to what 
is demanded by this grid (e.g. Hua XXIV, 348, where Husserl speaks of the “lawful 
nexus” ( gesetzliche Zusammenhang ) of nature). 
 Husserl returns again and again to meditate on this complex relation between things 
as they are encountered in the natural attitude and the formalized and idealized structur-
alization of those same things (confusingly called by the same  names ) as mediated by 
the scienti ﬁ c attitude. The key to the later Husserl is that he shifts to talking about the 
 attitude  rather than the  object in his later works. His essays on the nature of lived space 
versus geometrical space (including the “Genesis of the Copernican world” paper from 
1923/1924  Erste Philosophie,  Hua VII) treat this topic over and over again. 
 The challenge is to state how precisely the life-world is  interwoven with the 
scienti ﬁ c world, how lived space with its intuitive causal style experienced by 
embodied subjects provides support for scienti ﬁ cally described space, time and 
124
D. Moran
causality (see  Ideen I , §150). This issue appears in Husserl’s correspondence with 
the physicist Herman Weyl (1885–1955). 43 In a 1918 letter Husserl expresses his 
appreciation that a mathematician—Weyl—could recognise the importance of a 
phenomenological treatment of fundamental scienti ﬁ c concepts. Following Husserl, 
Weyl thinks the a priori concept of space in mathematical physics (with its notions 
of congruence, etc.) needs to be aligned with the phenomenological conception of 
lived space. 44 Indeed, already in  Ideen I , Husserl talks about the profound phenom-
enological problem of the “origin of the idea of space” ( Ideen I, 362; III/1, 315) in 
relation to the experience of things as near or far, oriented in a certain way with 
regard to us. He returns to this problem in “Die Ur-Arche Erde bewegt sich nicht” 
(c. 1934), and most famously in “Ursprung der Geometrie” (1936), where Husserl 
talks about the manner in which, for example, surfaces experienced in daily life 
become selected for various practical purposes (e.g., smoothness) and then become 
idealized into the concept of a two-dimensional surface without a third dimension 
of depth. Then this concept of two-dimensional surface is—through an idealizing 
abstraction—constituted as an object in itself with essential properties to be deter-
mined by its own science. 
 In the end Husserl’s  Ideen offered breakthrough analyses of the natural attitude 
and the surrounding world that eventually would be reworked in the discussions of 
the life-world in his late philosophy. Husserl saw  Ideen I  as the  ﬁ rst step on the path 
to the  Krisis . But the problems opened up by the manner in which the natural attitude 
and natural surrounding world are introduced in  Ideen I continue through to the 
 Krisis . In Husserl’s mature work, the real question is how to inhibit the manner in 
which the natural world of experience acts on me so that I can uncover my transcen-
dental life and its world of experience. As he writes in his Author’s Preface to Boyce 
Gibson’s translation of  Ideen I :
  On the other hand by means of this epochē the regard is freed for the universal phenomenon, 
“the world of consciousness purelyas such,” the world purely  as given in the manifold  ﬂ ux 
ofconscious life: that is,  as  appearing “ originaliter” in a manifold of “concordant” experiences. 
In these concordances it is characterized, for consciousness as “actually existing.”In itsde-
tails, however, but only in details, it can happen that this character of “actual being” is 
overturned and becomes “hollow semblance.” This universal  phenomenon, “ world existing 
for me”(and then also “existing for us”) is made the phenomenologist’s new  ﬁ eld of 
theoretical interest, the  ﬁ eld of a new sort of theoretical experience and experiential 
research. ( Ideen II , 412–13; Hua V, 145)  
 Husserl has shifted the emphasis from phenomenology as an a priori  exploration 
of pure consciousness to phenomenology as the a priori exploration of the life-world. 
To set phenomenology on this transcendental path is, for Husserl, the true achievement 
of  Ideas  I .     
 43  Hermann Weyl,  Raum Zeit Materie Vorlesungen über allgemeinene Relativitätstheorie , 1. 
Au ﬂ age (Berlin, 1918); trans. H. L. Brose,  Space Time Matter (London: Methuen, 1922). 
 44  See Weyl’s letter to Husserl of 26/27 March 1921 in Dirk van Dalen, “Four Letters from Edmund 
Husserl to Hermann Weyl,”  Husserl Studies 1 (1984): 1–12. 
125
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_8, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Introduction 
 To translate  Geisteswissenschaften with “human sciences” was a good choice of the 
editors of  Wilhelm Dilthey: Selected Works 1 because this term refers implicitly to 
the tradition of the “humanities” in the Anglo-Saxon cultural tradition. The same 
translation has been used in the more recent literature on Husserl’s writings though 
some prefer the originally Neo-Kantian term “cultural sciences” ( Kulturwissen-
schaften ), which has been used also occasionally by Husserl himself. 
 The problem with the term  Geisteswissenschaften is that  Geist has two connotations 
in the German tradition. The  ﬁ rst tradition has its roots in Hegel’s  Phänomenologie 
des Geistes and this phenomenology is not a phenomenology of the human mind but 
a historical topology of the appearances of the absolute spirit. The other tradition 
starts with the translation of John Stuart Mill’s  System of Logic. The usual translation 
for Mill’s term “moral sciences” in German is  Geisteswissenschaften . 2 Psychology, 
called by James Mill the analysis of the phenomena of the human mind, 3  is in John 
Stuart Mill’s  System the foundation of the moral sciences. This is also the case for 
the relation between psychology and the other  Geisteswissenschaften in Wilhelm 
Dilthey’s writings. The difference between Mill and Dilthey is that Mill’s method in 
 T. M.  Seebohm (*)
 Philosophisches Seminar, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität ,  Mainz ,  Germany 
e-mail:  embree@fau.edu 
 Chapter 8 
 Husserl on the Human Sciences in   Ideen II 
 Thomas  M.  Seebohm  
 1  Wilhelm Dilthey,  Selected Works , (SW) ed. R.A. Makkreel and F. Rodi (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press 1989). 
 2  J. St. Mill,  System of Logic: Ratiocinative and Inductive (London: Harrison and Co., 1843);  ﬁ rst 
German translation by J. Schiel, 1849. 
 3  James Mill,  Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , ed. J. St. Mill (London: Baldwin and 
Cradock, 1829). 
126
T.M. Seebohm
the moral sciences is inductive, experimental, and interested in causal explanations. 
Dilthey, on the contrary, characterized his psychology as a descriptive and analyzing 
( beschreibende und zergliedernde) science and distinguished in general between the 
methods of understanding ( Verstehen ) in the  Geisteswissenschaften and of explanation 
in the natural sciences. 4 
 Boyce Gibson’s early translation of  Geisteswissenschaften  in  Ideen I with 
“mental sciences” follows the second connotation. 5 The  ﬁ rst connotation is, on the 
contrary, clearly predominant in  Ideen II. 6 Especially the terminology of the third 
part and related passages in the appendices indicate that transcendental pheno-
menology has to be understood as the  absolute Geisteswissenschaft, the “absolute 
science of the spirit,” and that the human sciences are the spiritual sciences of the 
 geistige Welt, the spiritual world. The terminology of  Ideen II thus prepares Husserl’s 
later use of the terms  Geist and even  absoluter Geist, “absolute spirit,” as synonyms 
for the transcendental ego. 7  It is hence advisable to translate  Geisteswissenschaften 
in  Ideen II with “spiritual sciences.” 
 A text ought to be interpreted in its original context following the original intention 
of the author. The spiritual sciences—explicitly mentioned are only psychology and 
sociology—are according to  Ideen I  together with the natural sciences as empirical 
sciences in brackets after the phenomenological reduction. 8 The task of  Ideen II is, 
according to the outline of the whole project in the introduction of  Ideen I , the 
phenomenological analysis of the relation between phenomenology and the natural 
sciences, psychology and the spiritual sciences, and the a priori sciences. The task 
of Book III is to develop the idea of a true philosophy as absolute knowledge that 
can only be realized in pure phenomenology. 9 
 The original project of the second volume has been published as  Ideen II and 
 Ideen III in the Husserliana. 10 According to the preface by the editor, 11 the original 
 4  W. Dilthey’s method presupposes inner experience and is in this sense positivistic, positivism 
understood as nineteenth century positivism but not in the sense of the analytic positivism of the 
twentieth century. 
 5  Cf. the translation of  Ideen I, §60 in:  Ideas. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology , trans. 
W. R. Boyce Gibson (London: Allen and Unwin, 1931). Cf. also  Ideas pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to Phenomenological Philosophy , Book I, General Introduction to Pure 
Phenomenology, trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982). 
 6  Edmund Husserl,  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy , Second Book, Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution, trans. Richard Rojcewicz 
and André Schuwer (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989). 
 7  Cf. e.g.,  Die Krisis des europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie 
Husserliana VI. Edmund Husserl Gesammelte Werke (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950), 347, 
on  absoluter Geist and  absolute Historizität ; henceforth, Hua VI. 
 8  Hua III, 144. 
 9  Hua III, 7–8 
 10  Hua IV and V. The original textual basis of the editions of  Ideen II  and of  Ideen III is the collection 
of manuscripts of Edith Stein 1913f. in the typescript of Landgrebe 1923–1924. Landgrebe’s 
version of  Ideen II  together with later additions and notes of Husserl is the material that has been 
used in the edition of  Ideen II  in the Husserliana. Cf. Hua IV, Introduction of the Editor, XVIII.  
 11  Hua IV, XIV. 
127
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
project of the  Ideen II had two parts: (A) analyses of the constitution of the material, 
the animal, and the mental world, and (B) epistemological ( wissenschaftstheoretische ) 
considerations. (A) Was published following the Landgrebe typescript of 1923–1924 
as  Ideen II in the Husserliana. The “epistemological part” (8) was published in the 
Husserliana as  Ideen III 12 with the subtitle “Die Phänomenologie und die Fundamente 
der Wissenschaften.” There are no manuscripts for the third volume of the original 
project but there are the lectures on  ﬁ rst philosophy of 1923–1924 published as 
 Erste Philosophie I, II in the Husserliana. 13 
 Considering the history of the development from the original project to the 
 selection of the material that has been published as  Ideen II and  III both volumes 
should be read together as parts belonging to the second book of the original project. 
 Ideen II can be understood as representing (A) the constitution of material nature, 
animal nature, and the spiritual world. Reading  Ideen III as (B) epistemological 
considerations causes dif ﬁ culties. To characterize the  Ideen III as fundaments 
 (Fundamente) of the sciences invites this interpretation but the terms that are used 
in the texts of  Ideen II and  Ideen III are “foundation”  (Fundierung) and “founding” 
 (fundieren). 14 Foundations and founding are, however, terms belonging to formal 
ontology. If so, then investigations on  ontological foundations of the sciences cannot 
be understood as  epistemological re ﬂ ections in the narrower sense. The published 
version of  Ideen III adds re ﬂ ections on the ontological regions of reality 15 in which 
 ﬁ rst real things and then objects of the sciences are given 16 and on the relation 
between phenomenology and ontology in general. 17 Material nature and natural sciences 
are mentioned. 18 Much is said about psychology but virtually nothing about the 
other spiritual sciences. What  Ideen III say about the foundations of psychology as 
rational, i.e., eidetic psychology as a spiritual science can also be understood as  ﬁ rst 
step towards the investigations in the lectures on  Phänomenologische Psychologie. 19 
 Ideen III is, however, not of signi ﬁ cance for the analysis of the constitution of the 
spiritual world as the foundation of the spiritual sciences in Parts III and the 
appendices of  Ideen II . 20 
 The remarks about Dilthey in Part III and the appendices are of crucial signi ﬁ cance 
for the understanding of  Ideen II in the context of the discussion of the 
 12  Hua IV, XIV f. 
 13  Hua VII and VIII. 
 14  Cf. e.g., Hua V, 17. The real things are the foundations of the objects of the sciences. 
 15  Cf.  Ideen I , Hua III, §72, §153. 
 16  Hua V, Chapter I. 
 17  Hua V, Chapter 3. 
 18  Hua V. Of signi ﬁ cance is the remark on p. 9 that biology dealing with animals and plants and 
organic life is a part of material nature. Nothing more is said about the life sciences in  Ideen III. 
 19  Hua IX. 
 20  There are early manuscripts about the cognitive attitude of the spiritual sciences ( geisteswissen-
schaftliche Einstellung ) written in connection with the original project between 1913 and 1917 that 
have been dropped from the draft of the main text in Landgrebe version of 1923/1924 and added 
as appendices by Landgrebe together with further remarks from Husserl himself. Cf. Hua IV, esp. 
Appendices IV, V, X, XL XII part II, XIV and the remarks to the appendices of the editor, 417f. 
128
T.M. Seebohm
 Geisteswissenschaften in Germany in the beginning of the twentieth century. 
The remarks have a pre-history. Following Stumpf, Husserl characterized his method 
in the  ﬁ rst edition of the  Logische Untersuchungen  as  descriptive-psychologisch , i.e., as 
the method of a descriptive psychology. Dilthey called his psychology a descriptive 
and analyzing psychology. He praised Husserl’s  Logische Untersuchungen as a partial 
realization of his own projects 21  and used occasionally the term “phenomenological” 
to characterize his method. 22 He was therefore deeply offended by Husserl’s critique 
of historical relativism in the third section of “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” 
because he assumed that he was the target of this criticism and defended himself in 
a letter to Husserl 1911. Husserl’s answer emphasized that Dilthey was by no means 
the target but also that he and Dilthey would be able to agree in all questions of the 
interpretation of the human mind and the analysis of the problems of understanding 
of cultural objects. 23 Husserl’s repeated references to Dilthey can be understood as 
an extension of his answer and an indication of Dilthey’s signi ﬁ cance for the 
development of Husserl’s re ﬂ ections on the spiritual sciences in general. 24 
 Husserl praised Dilthey for his radical critique of the claim of the naturalistic, 
i.e., psycho-physical, physiological, and experimental psychology of the nineteenth 
century and his ability to explain the facts of mental life in his  ldeen zu einer 
beschreibenden und zergliedernden Psychologie of 1894 as a work of a genius. 
The theory of understanding ( Verstehen ) as the basic category of Dilthey’s psychology 
is not only able to analyze the laws of psychic life but together with them also the 
laws of interpersonal mental life, of culture and regions of mental culture, i.e., religion, 
the law, literature, and  ﬁ ne art. Understanding psychology is, hence, the basic 
science and foundation for all other mental sciences. What is missing in Dilthey is, 
however, precision in elementary analyses of experience and a distinction between 
the constitution of the psychic reality in the constitution of the animated living body 
and the constitution of the mental world. 
 The main shortcoming is Dilthey’s assumption that the empirical generalizations 
of a morphological typology based on inner experience and the inner reliving of 
foreign mental life is able to discover the universal laws of psychology and cultural 
 21  Wilhelm Dilthey,  Gesammelte Schriften , Vols 1–12 (Teubner, 1914ff.); Vol. VI,  Die geistige 
Welt. Zweite Häfte (1924), 13f., 39f., 322. 
 22  GS VII,  DerAufbau der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften  (1927), 296, 
“phenomenology of knowledge.” 
 23  Central passages of the letters can be found in  Phänomenologische Psychologie, Hua IX, Preface 
of the editor, XVII–XXI. English trans., Edmund Husserl,  Phenomenological Psychology , trans. 
John Scanlon (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977). 
 24  It is not possible to discuss the remarks about Dilthey point by point in this essay. The main 
references to Dilthey can be found in Hua IV, §48: Introduction to section III; appendix XII, 
§11,365 ff. and XIII, 393; and Hua IX,  Phänomenologische Psychologie §1, 5–6, 10; §2, esp. 13–14, 
and Appendices II, 357 and III, 361. On Husserland Dilthey, cf.  Dilthey und die Philosophie der 
Gegenwart, ed. E.W. Orth (Freiburg: Karl Alber, 1985), the essays of Ströker, Seebohm, Pfafferott, 
Makkreel, and Carr and  Dilthey and Phenomenology, eds. R. A. Makkreel and J. Scanlon, Current 
Continental Research 006 (Washington, D.C.: CARP & University Press of America, 1987), Part 
I: Dilthey, Husserl, and the Foundations of Science. 
129
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
spiritual life. Only the method of eidetic intuition is able to discover the essential 
structures of psychical and spiritual life and its cultural manifestations. Dilthey is 
not able to give a precise analysis of interpersonal spiritual life and, therefore, also 
not able to give a satisfying account of the speci ﬁ c objectivity of the manifestations, 
the works of spiritual life. 
 What is missing in Husserl’s critical appraisal are references to Dilthey’s 
 epistemological investigations of the methods of the historical spiritual sciences and 
their background in the methodological re ﬂ ections in the nineteenth century. 25 More 
will be said about this problem in some critical remarks in the end of this 
chapter. 26 
 Part III of  Ideen II on the constitution and ontological priority of the spiritual 
world presupposes Part II, the constitution of the animal world and Part II presupposes 
section I, the constitution of the material world. The considerations of  Ideen II on 
the spiritual sciences have, therefore, to begin with a short summary of section I and 
a survey of the basic theses of section II. 27 
 The real things of real nature are given in the natural attitude as material real 
things, animal things, and as things that are of value for practical life, valuable things. 28 
The objects of the natural sciences are theoretical objects. The givenness of theoretical 
objects has its foundation the givenness of real things in aesthetic synthesis (§18 a–c). 
Already the constitution of real things given in the natural attitude and, therefore, 
also the constitution of theoretical objects presuppose the subject not as a solipsistic 
subject but the subject as a member of an intersubjective community (§18 e, f, 
and h). The givenness of the theoretical objects of the natural sciences presupposes 
 25  The main source for Dilthey’s epistemological re ﬂ ections on the spiritual sciences is  Der Aufbau 
der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften  ﬁ rst published 1910 and then in GS VII; 
English trans.,  The Formation of the Historical World in the Human sciences, SW /11, (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002). The question is whether Husserl ever read the  Aufbau. 
There is no trace of such a reading in the material in  Ideen II or  Phänomenologische Psychologie. 
Husserl read and mentioned (Hua IX, 6) Dilthey’s  ldeen zu einer beschreibenden und zergliedern-
den Psychologie of 1884 (now in GS V 1924) and his remarks to Dilthey indicate that he also knew 
the  Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften of 1883 (now GS I 1922 and SW I,  Introduction to the 
Human Sciences.) 
 26  On the methodology and epistemology of the human sciences from Schleiermacher and Boeckh 
to Dilthey and Droysen, see R. A. Makkreel,  Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human Studies (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975), esp. Part Three; T. M. Seebohm, “Boeckh and Dilthey: The 
Development of Methodical Hermeneutics,”  Man and World 17 (1984): 325–46, and Thomas M. 
Seebohm,  Hermeneutics. Method and Methodology. Contributions to Phenomenology 50 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press, 2004), Chapter 3. 
 27  Two comprehensive essays on  Ideen II have to be mentioned: Alfred Schutz, “Edmund Husserl’s 
 Ideas , Volume II,”  Collected Papers III ,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy, ed. I. Schutz 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966) and Paul Ricoeur, “Husserl’s  Ideas II : Analyses and 
Problems,”  Husserl: An Analysis of his Phenomenology , trans. E.G. Ballard and L. Embree 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1967). 
 28  (8/9; 25) The references to paragraphs, numbers of appendices, and/or page numbers of  Ideen II, 
Hua IV will be given in parentheses on the following pages. 
130
T.M. Seebohm
an abstractive reduction that brackets all aspects of real things as things that are 
relevant for practical life (25f.). What is left are objects as facts ( Sachen ). The 
theoretical objects of physics, the pure material objects require in addition an 
abstraction from all secondary qualities of real things and theoretical objects. What 
is left are the primary qualities, i.e., measurable and in this sense mathematically 
quanti ﬁ able qualities. 29 This second abstraction excludes in addition all essential 
properties of animal nature. 
 Part II begins in the introduction with a description of the givenness of the souls 
of humans and animals in the natural attitude. What “animal nature” means is, 
hence, “animated nature.” The soul is originally given together with and in the material 
living body but it has its own unity as an endless stream of lived experiences without 
beginning and end. The I is a unity within the unity of a real soul as an I with a 
certain character and certain abilities. It is this I that  has a body and  has a soul (§21, 
93/94). This structure, including its foundation in the givenness of the material living 
body, is the foundation for the givenness of others as other living bodies, empathy 
and the constitution of intersubjectivity (95). 
 The analysis of the constitution of this structure presupposes in a  ﬁ rst step the 
“abstraction” from the givenness of the living body in the natural attitude that is 
implied in the phenomenological reduction. What remains is the pure spiritual ego 
as cogito and its cogitations. The detailed analyses of the constitution of animated 
nature therefore starts in Chapter I with an extension of the analyses of  Ideen I that 
can also be read as a  ﬁ rst sketch of the  Analysen zur passiven Synthesis and their 
application in the “V. Cartesianische Meditation . ” 30 The task of the following inves-
tigations is the analysis of the foundations of the understanding of human beings as 
persons with their personal environment as self-subsisting individuals in the spiri-
tual world of customs, laws, religion etc.(§34, esp. 141). 
 The  ﬁ rst step is the analysis of the constitution of the reality of the living body as 
an organ of the solipsistic soul. The living body is given in bodily localized sensitiv-
ity,  Emp ﬁ ndnis , and as an organ of will in the kinaesthetic movements of the living 
body (§§36–38). The living material body is furthermore a center of orientation, a 
“Here” opposed other material things in a manifold “There.” This localization of the 
givenness of the living body is not the givenness of the living body in objective real 
space. It is a solipsistic system of localization as one material thing among others 
given in “causal connections,” the sensitive experience of the spontaneity of bodily 
actions and the passivity in the experience of feeling conditioned by the presence of 
real material bodies in the There outside. The constitution of the solipsistic living 
 29  §18 d and g. What is said there can be read as a  ﬁ rst sketch of what will be said later in the  Crisis 
about the abstraction that is a necessary presupposition for the theoretical attitude of the natural 
sciences in general, cf. e.g., Hua VI, §2, esp. 3 and 4, §66, 230 and §§8–10 about the mathematical 
abstraction presupposed in the theoretical attitude of physics. 
 30  Cf. Hua IV, pp. 99/ I 00, 104 and Hua III p. 136/7, the  Analysen zur passiven Synthesis, Hua IX, 
Parts III and IV, and the  Cartesianische Meditationen, Hua I, §§44–46. Edmund Husserl,  Analyses 
Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis , trans. Anthony J. Steinbock (Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 2001). 
131
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
body is, hence, given in the inner perspective of the sensitivity of the living body in 
the  ﬂ ow of psychic life. It is also given simultaneously in the outer perspective as a 
center that is a correlate of a world in the There outside the living body that condi-
tions the inner experience and can be conditioned by the activities of the living body 
as an organ of the will (§§39–42). 
 What is originally present in the sensory experience of the inseparable unity of 
solipsistic body and soul are (a) the material things given in the There outside and 
the partial givenness of the own solipsistic living body from the outside as a material 
thing and (b) the individual and unique  ﬂ ow of inner experience in which the solip-
sistic subject is given for itself. What is not yet given in solipsistic experience are 
the material thing given as an independent real thing in real space and other living 
bodies as animated bodies in the natural attitude. Animals, i.e., animated material 
bodies of humans and non-human animals, are given beyond solipsistic experience 
as bodies in original presence ( Urpräsenz ) as an appresented psychic inner life. 
Empathy ( Einfühlung ) is beyond simple appresentation an intentional attitude of an 
ongoing steady appresentation—but not presentation—of their foreign inner live 
given with the experience of the presence of their living bodies (§§43–45). 
 Empathy founded in appresentation is constitutive for the givenness of intersub-
jectivity and with it for the constitution of the human ego  (lch-Mensch) given in the 
natural attitude. Intersubjectivity is, as already mentioned in Part I, the foundation 
for the experience of real material things and real material nature in the natural atti-
tude. The aesthesiological constitution of real things in the natural attitude is the 
foundation for the theoretical objects of the natural sciences that can be given after 
the reductive abstraction that brackets all the characters of real things given in inter-
subjective practical life. The attitude of the natural sciences presupposes, hence, a 
 ﬁ eld of an intersubjective experience in which real things, material as well as ani-
mated real things, are given (§§46, 47, esp. 171–72). 
 The  ﬁ eld of intersubjective experience in which nature and the subject itself is 
given in the spiritual world is the realm of objects in the theoretical attitude of the 
spiritual sciences. The reference to Dilthey in the introduction to Part III (§48, 172–
73) indicates that the following analysis of the personalistic attitude can be under-
stood as the phenomenological explication of Dilthey’s intentions. Dilthey’s 
understanding, descriptive and analyzing psychology based on inner experience is 
for him the foundation for all other disciplines of the spiritual sciences.  Ideen II 
replaces Dilthey’s basic category of understanding 31 and its foundation with the 
descriptive analysis of the difference between introjection and empathy. The foun-
dations of empathy in the constitution of the solipsistic animate body (§§43–45) are 
the foundations of the personalistic attitude and the distinction between the natural-
istic and the personalistic attitude. The personalistic attitude is the foundation for 
the analysis of the spiritual attitude, the spiritual world, and the spiritual sciences. 
 31  See, however, the critical remark in fn. 40 about a misinterpretation of Dilthey’s distinction in 
Appendix XIII, 393. 
132
T.M. Seebohm
 The analysis of the constitution of the spiritual world starts with a summary of 
the analysis of the constitution of animated living bodies in the naturalistic attitude. 
The living body is in this attitude given as physical real object. The soul is given as 
a layer of real events that can be localized on a living body, i.e., as the aesthesiological 
layer of sensations and sensitive experience on living bodies. The inner temporality 
of lived experience is understood as a phase of the objective space-time. This given-
ness of the other soul can be characterized as “introjection,” but this introjection is 
not directed to something behind the physical givenness of the living body (§49 
a–c). The naturalistic attitude is, however, only a possible attitude because it 
presupposes an abstractive reduction and has its foundation in the natural world 
given in the natural attitude (§49 d and e). The other possible attitude is the personalistic 
attitude and with it the attitude of the spiritual sciences. 
 The subject is given in the personalistic attitude as a person in the center of its 
personal environment. The world is given as the world of the consciousness of the 
individual personal I. The I as person, the egoic person, is given in this world in its 
relations to the real things as a representing, feeling, evaluating, striving, and acting 
person. The world is given as experienced world in sensory appearances. The real 
things in the world are given in the appearances as valuable things, i.e., as pleasant, 
painful, beautiful and ugly things in immediate experience. The person is related to 
the real things in practical acts. Practical needs and desires are the motivations for 
practical acts. What is desired are useful objects that can be used in practical acts to 
produce valuable artifacts  (Erzeugnisse). The relations between things and persons 
are in the personal attitude not given as causal relations. They are given as motiva-
tions, enticements of more or less powerful tendencies for evaluations, practical 
activities, and  ﬁ nally theoretical judgments about the pleasant or painful, beautiful 
or ugly, and useful character of objects. The relations of the person to real things 
are, seen from the viewpoint of pure phenomenology, intentional acts (§50). 
 The person considers itself, its relations to real things, and its motivations in the 
personal attitude as a member of a personal community. Other persons are given in 
a personal community ( Personenverband ). They are not given as introjected in a 
material living body: They are given immediately in empathy as persons together 
with the real things in the common environment of a personal community. Persons 
are given in the personal community as independent subjects with their own rights 
in a system of moral and legal relations in which each person is a person only 
because it is recognized as a person by other persons as a subject-object. The egoical 
person is motivated in the personal community to reach agreements with other 
persons and is, therefore, in ﬂ uenced by other persons. This system of reciprocal 
in ﬂ uences, agreements and disagreements, is constitutive for the givenness of the 
common environment including not only a real environment of physical things and 
animals but also an environment of recognized ideal entities. 
 The egoic person has to pursue its own goals in the environment of the personal 
community. The social community is in turn open for actual and potential commu-
nication with external environments of other personal communities, other spiritual 
contexts in its environment. This openness is constitutive for the idea of the world 
as spiritual world, the totality of different types of real and ideal objects (195 f). 
133
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
Real things are given in the different perspectives of different personal communities 
in the spiritual world. The spiritual world, though not apprehended as objective 
physical nature in the naturalistic attitude, has as its medium a common intersubjec-
tive, i.e., objective space-time in which the different personal communities and 
 ﬁ nally the individual persons are located in the spiritual world. 
 Real things and real nature can be determined as the true objects and true nature 
in itself 32 behind their appearances for different personal subjects and personal com-
munities in a theoretical attitude. They are constituted in this attitude as theoretical 
objects that cannot be given in sensory perspective variations. This theoretical atti-
tude is the naturalistic attitude of the natural sciences. The investigation ends at this 
point in a vicious circle (210). The starting point was the apprehension of humans 
in their physically given living bodies in the naturalistic attitude and ended with the 
analysis of the givenness of the soul. The analysis of the  ﬂ ow of lived experience 
ended with the turn to the personalistic attitude and the constitution of the spiritual 
world. The outcome of this analysis was, however, in the end the recognition that 
the world given for universal intersubjectivity as the spiritual world can also be 
given as the correlate of universal intersubjectivity as the world as correlate of the 
naturalistic attitude. 
 A solution for the problem of the circle requires (§49) a detailed recapitulation 
of the analysis of the structures of the personal I given in the  inspection sui  in self-
awareness and self-consciousness. Self-consciousness is the re ﬂ ective awareness of 
the not re ﬂ ected consciousness of that what is pre-given as the Not-I for the personal 
self (211–12; cf. 248). The I is in its self-awareness not given to itself as an I  in the 
living body. It is aware of itself as  having a body and this body is, on the one hand, 
an organ of the bodily activities of the I, reacting to pre-given real things in acts of 
attention, judging, evaluating, and willing, and as the decision to realize change in 
the pre-given environment of the I. The I as having the body is, on the other hand, 
also given as the passive I, the I of receptivity, of being attracted or repulsed by 
stimuli  (Reize) from presence or absence of real things, the feelings accompanying 
such stimuli, and  ﬁ nally by the self-awareness of the bodily activities of the I. 
 The active and passive relations between I and Not-I are real relations and real 
relations must be distinguished from intentional relations between the personal I 
and things as intentional objects. Intentional relations can be given together with the 
real relations between the I and real things but they and their intentional objects can 
also be given after or even without real relations. Something can be my intentional 
object as a noema without being really present in a real relation. 
 Relations between real things in real nature, of objects ( Sachen ) given in the 
naturalistic attitude, including the mathematically interpreted theoretical objects of 
physics, are  causal relations (216, cf. 230–31). Considering the relations between 
the personal subject and its environment including real things but also ideal objects 
and noematic objects in general  because referring to these relations is understood as the 
 32  They are intersubjectively given not for a relative community but as intersubjective in principle; 
cf.  Ideen I, Hua III, 113. 
134
T.M. Seebohm
because of  motivations. Stimuli of sensory impressions motivate the subjective-objective 
effects in the passive awareness of objects. They motivate furthermore feelings of 
pleasure and pain of the I and active goal-directed reactions of the body as an organ 
of the I. What can be distinguished are the motivations following the norms of 
reason, i.e., of logical thinking and evaluations and secondly motivations determined 
by associations belonging to the sphere of passivity and habits. Lived experience is 
thus a web of motivations that are partially active and conscious and partially pas-
sive and often not immediately accessible for explicit re ﬂ ections. Even the 
determination of every temporal phase by the preceding phase in the structure of 
immanent time consciousness can be characterized as a type of passive motivation 
(225, cf. 227). 
 The experience of others is in the naturalistic attitude a theoretical  introjection of 
the soul as a dependent appendix of a material living body. The experience of other 
persons in the personal attitude is the immediate experience of the other person 
as the subject of its motivations in its environment of real things and other persons 
(228–29). The living body of the other person is understood as an organ of the 
bodily actions of the other person, as expressions of its motivations and actions 
(234–35). Persons in communities of persons are understood as subjects of motivated 
actions that are determined in reciprocal motivations and not as causal relations. 
The “because” of  motivations of others is like my own motivations immediately 
understood and this  understanding is not in need of further causal explanations, 
much less causal explanations de ﬁ ned in terms of mathematical theories (230–31; 
235–36). 
 The spiritual world includes other persons, the own personal community and 
external personal communities, but it includes also (239, 243–44, cf. 182, 195 f) 
cultural objects: artifacts produced for daily use ( Gebrauchsgegenstände ),written 
texts ( Schriftwerke ), works of art, musical works, scienti ﬁ c and legal literature, 
symbols, etc. (239, 243–44, cf. 182, 195f.). The “body” of such works of the spirit 
is physical but it is a body of a spiritual meaning. The physically given signs, e.g., 
letters, sentences are animated ( haben Beseelung ). They intend an ideal object. 33 
The spiritual meaning of the signs and their sensory sign matter are not separable 
(238). They are partially real but they are signs only because they mean ideal objects. 
They are objective spirit as manifestations of the spirit (239; 243). The mental world 
is, hence, (1) the world in which the person  ﬁ nds itself in introspection  and in the 
representations of the other person(s) in empathy. It is (2) then world of communi-
ties of higher order, the spiritual world, including other communities that have on 
different levels different common spirits, the spirit of a nation, of a culture, a religion 
etc. (3). This universe is accessible in the manifestations of spirit. 
 33  It is, according to  Ideen II, 243, not dif ﬁ cult to give a detailed analysis. However, such an analy-
sis would be the epistemological analysis of the “methodology and encyclopaedia,” e.g., of the 
science of classical antiquity according to August Böckh and this is by no means a simple enter-
prise, cf. below fn. 49. 
135
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
 The task of chapter 3 of Part III on the ontological priority of the spiritual world 
to the naturalistic world (281f.) is to resolve the circle mentioned above (210). The 
 ﬁ rst step is to show that the circle is implied in the assumption of the parallelism of 
the spiritual and the naturalistic world. The second step is the refutation of the 
parallelism. 
 The spirit presupposes the soul given in the  ﬂ ow of lived experience and the soul 
is dependent on the living body for the personalistic attitude, i.e., the attitude of the 
spiritual sciences. The activities of the spirit are, hence, dependent on the living 
body as physical body and the works of the spirit are likewise as objects given as 
physical objects in the world of the naturalistic attitude. They are, however, works 
of the spirit only because they have a spiritual meaning. The spirit acts on nature but 
these actions  (Wirkungen) have not the character of causal relations between natural 
objects. They are of signi ﬁ cance only for personal communities and their 
environment. 
 The transition from the attitude of the spiritual sciences to the naturalistic atti-
tude presupposes an abstraction. The abstraction excludes the spiritual attitude and 
the spiritual world. The animated body and the soul are not given for a person who 
has a soul and a body. The body is given in the naturalistic attitude as a physical 
body and the soul is given as introjected in the body. 
 Seen from the viewpoint of the spiritual attitude, the natural sciences appear as a 
work of the spirit. However, seen from the viewpoint of the theoretical I, the I in the 
theoretical attitude, 34 the transition to the naturalistic attitude and the implied 
abstraction is an act of the theoretical I, but the attitude of the spiritual sciences 
implies  also an abstraction, the abstraction from the correlate of the naturalistic 
attitude the physical world. There are, hence, two parallel worlds, the world of the 
spiritual sciences and the world of the natural sciences for the theoretical I (289). 
 The presupposition of this parallelism implies (a) the assumption that every event 
in the world of nature has its correlate in the spiritual world and vice versa and happen 
at the same time and (b) the additional assumption 35 that both events are determined 
by reciprocal causal connections. The usual assumption is that the “place” in which 
that happens is the central organ, the brain (290–294). A phenomenological analysis 
of temporality is able to reject assumption (a). Events in the central organ follow 
each other in the structure of objective time. Events in the lived experience happen, 
in the structures of inner time consciousness. The hyletic contents emerge in the 
actual now in its protentional horizon and  ﬂ ow down in the continuum of retentions. 
Given this distinction it is also impossible to understand the reciprocal conditioning, 
the acting  (das Wirken) of the soul and the spirit on the living body and vice versa 
as a causal relation. Causal laws are the conditions of the course of events in the 
 34  The theoretical I ought not to be understood as the transcendental ego. The theoretical I is the I 
of the theoretical attitude of the natural as well as the spiritual sciences. 
 35  It is an assumption because there are other assumptions, e.g., the metaphysical assumptions of 
the occasionalists following Geulincx and Malebranche rejecting a possible Cartesian  in ﬂ uxus 
physicus in the brain and assuming “occasional” interventions of God. 
136
T.M. Seebohm
naturalistic world. What conditions events in the soul and the spiritual world are 
motivations and motivations can be immediately understood. Causal relations 
are discovered as causal laws in the naturalistic attitude with the aid of experimental 
research (295–96). 
 The spirit depends partially on nature but this nature is the nature of the natural 
attitude and not the physical nature of the naturalistic attitude. If we strike out the 
spirit, no nature is left. But the spirit as isolated individual spirit and its motivations 
without a personal community is left if we strike out nature (207). Individuality in 
the spiritual sense is absolute individuality and has its motivation in itself. It is the 
 heacceitas in which concrete essence and existence cannot be separated (300). The 
individuality of real things in the natural attitude is a relative individuality and 
determined by external causality. It is an open individuality that emerges and can 
vanish in the course of events. Objective nature is a correlate of the naturalistic 
attitude and not a pre-given trans ﬁ nite whole in the actual Now of lived experience. 
It is only given in the progress of the research of the natural sciences that is open for 
revisions and corrections (299). 
 The appendices offer in most cases other versions of the analyses in the main 
text. There are, however, also (a) additions considering a possible transition from 
the spiritual attitude to the transcendental phenomenological attitude and (b) one 
addition in which the spiritual and historical world is characterized as lifeworld. 
There are  ﬁ nally (c) additions that are relevant for the methods and the system of the 
spiritual sciences.
 (a)  Psychology is the basic discipline of the spiritual sciences  ﬁ rst as empirical 
descriptive psychology and then as eidetic psychology. Re ﬂ ections on the 
presuppositions of psychology prepared the path to the idea of a pure phenom-
enology, the eidetic and then the transcendental reduction in the  Logische 
Untersuchungen. This  ﬁ rst approach has epistemological and philosophical 
shortcomings. Re ﬂ ections on the presuppositions of the empirical spiritual 
sciences in general and the structures of the spiritual world in eidetic intuition 
include all regional ontologies and all a priori disciplines. They offer a new and 
comprehensive path to pure phenomenology (IV, 313–14). 
 As understanding sciences, the spiritual sciences presuppose empathy. They 
are empirical positive sciences of persons, social communities, and the formation 
and genetic transformation of persons and social communities. Real things and 
real nature are reduced to constitutive unities given in intersubjective regulari-
ties (XII, II. 348, 363–64, 369–70). 
 The naturalistic attitude presupposes an abstractive reduction. No abstractive 
reduction is required for the transition to the spiritual attitude. The world of the 
spirit world is the world of the natural attitude, the world of the original experience 
of persons and their social and natural environment. Transcendental phenome-
nology is the absolute spiritual science. Only one step is required for the transition 
from the spiritual attitude to transcendental phenomenology, the phenomenologi-
cal reduction (XII, 354, cf. 366, 369). 
 A person has a history and this history implies in its horizon the historical 
world of past and present cultures. Historiography is the description of true history 
137
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
as a consistent experience from the viewpoint of the actual historical presence 
of the historian. History is (a) originally accessible in empirical descriptions of 
the environment of persons and social communities. It is (b) explicable in a 
universal empirical morphology on the level of objective science and it is 
 ﬁ nally (c) explicable in a priori descriptions of the essential structures 
( Wesensformen ) of persons, their environment, and their historical horizon (XII, 
11, 353–55, 371–72). 
 The history of the natural sciences is as history a special discipline of the 
spiritual sciences but that does  not imply that real nature is an object of the 
spiritual sciences. Nature is an object of the natural sciences and persons as liv-
ing bodies as well as all other spiritual objects are accessible for the natural 
sciences as physical objects. There is thus not only an opposition but a remark-
able parallelism between the natural and the spiritual sciences. 36 
 (b)  Of signi ﬁ cance for the further development of phenomenology is that the term 
“natural world” in appendix is replaced by the term “lifeworld” in appendix 
XIII and what is said about history in appendix XII is said about the lifeworld 
in appendix XIII. 37 The spiritual world was characterized in XII as the world of 
the natural attitude. Lifeworld is, hence, a new term for the world given in the 
natural attitude. 
 (c)  Setting aside the passages about psychology and history and their methods and 
a remark about linguistics,  Sprachforschung (XII, 367), no other disciplines of 
the human sciences are mentioned in  Ideen I . An outline of a system of the 
objects of the spiritual sciences can be found only in Appendix V. Mentioned 
are (V, 315 f) (1) the general structures of the natural environment of humans 
and human communities, (2) Humans and animals in the environment,(3) 
Commodities ( Güter ), works of art like artifacts, tools etc., and (4) Customs and 
moral principles, laws, language etc. i.e., in general the systems of norms and 
conventions that determine social personal communities. Communities that are 
communities without a will and goal directed actions are called social person-
alities, e.g., linguistic or ethnic communities. 
 Objects given in spiritual life have a genesis. There are (1) 38 biographies inter-
ested in the genetic developments of individual persons and (2) different types of 
histories, (2.a) the histories of concrete social communities, towns, nations etc.; 
(2.b) histories of the arts and the sciences and other irreal (ideal) objects; (2.c.) 
histories of social change and the development of mankind in general and including 
the pre-historical origin of humanity and its animal-like ancestors. 
 36  XIV pp. 390 ff, esp. 392–93. What is said in appendix XIV, probably from 1917, is at least  prima 
facie not compatible with the refutation of this parallelism in chapter 3 of Part III. Cf. the notes to 
the text of the editor, pp. 423–24. 
 37  373–75. Both texts were written in 1917. Cf. editorial remarks, pp. 418, 423. 
 38  The enumeration in the following list is added. 
138
T.M. Seebohm
 Concluding Remarks 
 Ontological foundations of the sciences are regional ontologies. The ontological 
apriori of empirical sciences can be discovered in morphological re ﬂ ections on the 
empirical material and beyond that in eidetic intuition. The transcendental phenom-
enological justi ﬁ cation of this a priori requires the analysis of the constitution of 
eidetic intuition and of the regional ontologies. 39 
 The task of  Ideen II  was the analysis of the constitution of the ontological 
foundations of the sciences. The task of  Ideen III  was the analysis of these founda-
tions. 40 What  Ideen II offers is the analysis of the constitution of the different 
foundations of the natural and the spiritual sciences. The phenomenological 
analysis was able to justify Dilthey’s intuitions and to eliminate its shortcomings. 41 
What can be found in  Ideen III  is an explication of the ontological foundations 
of psychology. 42 An analysis of the constitution of personal communities and 
the social lifeworld can be found in  Ideen II. Nothing is said in about the foun-
dations of the other social sciences in the  Ideen III. Apart from the analysis of 
the constitution of intersubjectivity, especially as presented in the  Cartesianische 
Meditationen , 43 not very much beyond that can be found in Husserl’s later 
works, but it can be assumed that Husserl thought that the work of Alfred Schutz 
would  ﬁ ll this gap. 44  
 39  Ideen III, Hua V, Chapters 1, 2 §§5–7, Chapters 3 and 4, cf. Appendix I, §6. 
 40  Some remarks about the ontological foundations of physics can be found in Chapter 2, §11. 
 41  Cf. above fn. 30, and about the references to Dilthey, §48 of  Ideen II in the main text. The critique 
of Dilthey’s distinction in Appendix XIV, 393 is incompatible with what is said in §48 and with 
Dilthey’s distinction between the natural sciences as sciences of causal explanations and the spiri-
tual sciences of understanding. XIV claims that Dilthey characterized the spiritual sciences as 
descriptive sciences and also points out that the natural sciences presuppose descriptions. Dilthey 
characterizes his psychology as descriptive, but this description presupposes, like all other spiritual 
sciences, understanding, i.e., precisely that what is analyzed as empathy in  Ideen II. 
 42  What is said in  Ideen III is a  ﬁ rst sketch of the detailed analyses in the  Phänomenologische 
Psychologie , Hua IX and the  Analysen zur passiven Synthesis, Hua XI. 
 43  Hua I, §§42–47. 
 44  Alfred Schutz was dissatis ﬁ ed with the analysis of the constitution of social groups, cf. pp. 
38–39, fn. 26. In his review of Husserl’s  Méditations Cartésiennes (1931) in the  Deutsche 
Literaturzeitung , December 18, 1932, Schutz writes “To Husserl’s list I would like to a social sci-
ence which, while limited to the social sphere, is of an eidetic character. The task < of such a social 
science > would be the intentional analysis of those manifold forms of higher-level social acts and 
social formations that are founded on the—already executed—constitution of the alter ego. This 
can be achieved in static and genetic analyses, and such an interpretation would accordingly have 
to demonstrate the aprioristic structures of the social sciences.” Trans. Helmut Wagner in Alfred 
Schutz,  Collected Papers , Vol. IV, ed. Helmut Wagner, George Psathas, and Fred Kersten 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996), 164. 
139
8 Husserl on the Human Sciences in  Ideen II 
 The eidetic structures of history or historiography 45  presuppose genetic 
constitution. 46 The genetic aspect of history together with the analysis of the 
animal nature and its signi ﬁ cance for the spiritual world admits the recognition of 
the animal origin of the historical development of mankind in the context of the 
spiritual sciences. 47 Nothing beyond that is said about the constitution and the foun-
dations, set aside the epistemology, of the historical spiritual sciences. There is 
no evidence in  Ideen II that Husserl ever read Dilthey’s  Der Aufbau der geschicht-
lichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften. 48  Dilthey’s distinctions between the 
historical and the systematic or social spiritual sciences, between elementary 
and higher understanding, between pre-methodical and methodical understanding, 
and between immediate and  ﬁ xed life expressions are not mentioned. There is also 
no evidence that Husserl was familiar with the background of Dilthey’s epistemology 
of the spiritual sciences in the development of the re ﬂ ections on the methodology of 
the philological historical method, hermeneutics, and histories in the literature about 
hermeneutics of the nineteenth century. 49 There is no word about Schleiermacher’s 
 ﬁ rst and second canon of hermeneutics or about Boeckh’s re ﬂ ections on the meth-
odology of philology and his distinction of grammatical, individual, historical, and 
generic interpretation and critique. 50 
 The task of  Ideen II  is the analysis of the constitution of the ontological foun-
dations of the empirical sciences. This analysis is the presupposition for but it does 
not yet include a phenomenological epistemology of the empirical sciences. It is, 
hence, not a shortcoming of  Ideen II  that nothing is said about the problems 
belonging to the epistemology of the spiritual sciences and especially the historical 
spiritual sciences. 51 The theoretical cognitive attitude of empirical sciences in 
general brackets the practical interests of the lived experience in the present lifeworld. 
 45  Both terms are used as synonyms. The methodologies of hermeneutics and histories of the nineteenth 
century distinguished historical research and historiography as representations of the results of 
historical research. See  Hermeneutics Method and Methodology l.c., fn. 25, §l0 on Droysen. 
 46  Husserl distinguished later between genesis as subjective genesis and generation as the genesis 
of intersubjective communities in manuscripts 1929–1936 published as  Zur Phänomenologie der 
Intersubjekivität III, Hua XV. 
 47  Appendix V, 316. 
 48  Cf. above, fn. 24 and 25. 
 49  Cf. §§8, 9, n. 44. 
 50  Philology, and its methodology, hermeneutics, the basic discipline of the philological historical 
method and histories is not mentioned in  Ideen II. What is mentioned is linguistics  (Sprachfor-
s chung) , but this covers only the lowest level of Boeckh’s methodology, grammatical interpretation 
and critique. 
 51  A phenomenological epistemology of the empirical sciences requires more than the phenomeno-
logical givenness of the ideal objects of mathematics. The distinction of adequate and inadequate 
evidence is not suf ﬁ cient because there is no  ﬂ awless adequacy of evidence, e.g. of presently rec-
ognized “laws of nature.” Knowledge in the empirical sciences remains fallible. This must be 
added to the investigation of LI Zhongwei, “Towards a Husserlian Conception of Epistemology” 
in:  Advancing Phenomenology. Essays in Honor of Lester Embree, eds. T. Nenon & P. Blosser, 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), sect. 4 and 5, pp. 124f. 
140
T.M. Seebohm
It has, however, roots in basic needs of the lifeworld. 52 This root is in case of the 
spiritual sciences the practical need to avoid misunderstanding and not-understanding 
in the process of understanding in communications. The  ﬁ rst step of a phenomeno-
logical analysis of the epistemological problems of the spiritual sciences is the 
descriptive analysis of the difference between the temporal structures of the 
understanding of bodily expressions of other persons in the present and the physically 
 ﬁ xed “works of the spirit” of authors in the past. This step determines the epistemo-
logical distinction of the historical and the social spiritual sciences. The historical 
sciences are restricted to the interpretation of the physically  ﬁ xed “works of the 
spirit” of authors of the past. Misunderstandings and failures of understanding in 
present communications can be eliminated in dialogues. 53 The interpretation of 
 ﬁ xed life expressions of authors in the past need methodologically guided interpre-
tations. The  ﬁ rst methodological canon for such interpretations requires that a text 
has to be interpreted in its own and not the context of the interpreter, i.e., the canon 
implies a methodological abstraction. 54 Historical research presupposes such 
interpretations in the reconstruction of “what really happened” in a past phase of a 
foreign historical development. 55 
 52  Practical life is vitally interested in successful predictions of events following certain actions. 
This is the pre-scienti ﬁ c root of the theoretical interest of the natural sciences in causal connections 
and of the development of a scienti ﬁ c technology. 
 53  Cf. §§33–35, l.c.: 44. 
 54  Cf. §§27 and 36, l.c. 44. 
 55  The  ﬁ rst canon implies a methodological abstraction. The philologist and the historian has to 
“bracket” the prejudices of the own historical context. The “uninterested observation” of research 
in the social sciences requires also an abstraction. It is, hence, a mistake to assume that the 
methodology of the human sciences as sciences does not imply methodological abstractions. 
 Part II 
 After World War I  
143
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_9, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Ideen I in Spain and Hispano-America 
 The reception of  Ideen I in Spain and Hispano-America has had two broad periods 
(with variations in the different countries): the  ﬁ rst one characterized by enthusiasm 
and rapid expansion, with some original work employing the “phenomenological 
method” (or applying some phenomenological thesis), but with a limited and some-
times insuf ﬁ cient knowledge of Husserl’s work; the second, started roughly along 
with the beginnings of  Husserliana in 1950 (in some countries much later, or very 
gradually), characterized by a better knowledge of Husserl’s works, a dedication to 
analysis and exegesis, but with a somewhat less creative spirit. It will be impossible 
to substantiate this broad outlook in the story that follows. Also, the fact of an inde-
pendent chapter in this volume devoted to Ortega y Gasset obliges us to consider it 
an indispensable supplement of the present one. 
 The so-called School of Madrid formed around Ortega was to a certain extent 
responsible for the view of  Ideen I  as an extreme sort of “idealist” (and “intellectual-
ist”) de ﬁ nition of phenomenology and of other peculiar distortions. In his doctorate 
dissertation of 1921, 1 Xavier Zubiri (1898–1983) reads the phenomenological 
reduction in  Ideen I as a methodological tool that gives way to the study of essences 
(thus effectively merging the phenomenological and the eidetic reductions). 
 A. Z. Quijano (*)
 Department of Philosophy, Michoacana University ,  Morelia ,  Michoacán ,  Mexico 
 Chapter 9 
 The Spanish-Speaking World and José 
Vasconcelos 
 Antonio  Zirión Quijano  
 1  Ensayo de una teoría fenomenológica del juicio (Madrid: Tipografía de la Revista de Archivos, 
Bibliotecas y Museos, 1923). 
144
A.Z. Quijano
The same understanding is found 40 years later in the lesson on Husserl in his  Cinco 
lecciones de  ﬁ losofía . 2 This set a standard that determined much of the reception of 
phenomenology in Spain and Hispano-America. 3 
 Zubiri (like Ortega) was also in ﬂ uential in the dedication to phenomenology by 
José Gaos (1900–1969), who conducted his doctorate research on Husserl’s critique 
of psychologism and, still in Spain, prepared an “Introduction to Phenomenology” 
to submit in an examination for a chair. 4 Here, Husserl’s phenomenology “is 
expounded in the de ﬁ nite way in which Husserl himself expounds it in his  Ideas, ” 
as “the descriptive eidetic science of the pure phenomena that integrate pure con-
sciousness.” But as this last motif was viewed as an “idealist feature in Husserl’s 
phenomenology,” Gaos abandoned it in his own phenomenological work, where the 
phenomenological method is vaguely understood as descriptive and eidetic. 5 
 Even though several other Spanish philosophers interested in Husserl had to  ﬂ ee 
from Spain (among these, Joaquín Xirau, Juan David García Bacca, and Eduardo 
Nicol went, like Gaos, to Mexico), Husserlian phenomenology did not lose all 
momentum in Spain in the post-war period. Serious interest in Husserl’s teachings 
was maintained through Sergio Rábade Romeo (1925–), devoted mainly to gnoseo-
logical themes, 6 and Antonio Millán Puelles (1921–2005), whose main concerns 
were ontological. 7 A student of Rábade, Javier San Martín (1946–), 8 has been a 
fervent promoter of Husserlian phenomenology in Spain, and has paid special atten-
tion to  Ideen I in several works. 9 Miguel García-Baró (1953–), disciple of Millán 
Puelles and a leading  ﬁ gure in phenomenology today, has given in  Vida y mundo. 
 2  Madrid: Sociedad de estudios y publicaciones, 1963. 
 3  The precise role of phenomenology in Zubiri’s later and most in ﬂ uential thought (mainly in his 
metaphysics and his noology) is a matter of interpretation, but it can be said at least that this 
thought was developed always in a tense dialogue and discussion with main motives of Husserlian 
phenomenology, which are also those present in  Ideen I (consciousness, intentionality, reality, 
actuality, noesis and noema, etc.). 
 4  This text, together with the doctoral dissertation, was published as  Introducción a la fenomenología, 
seguida de La crítica del psicologismo en Husserl (Xalapa: Universidad Veracruzana, 1960).  
 5  See  En torno a la  ﬁ losofía mexicana (México: Porrúa y Obregón, 1953), and later,  De la  ﬁ losofía 
(México: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1962) and  Del hombre (México: Fondo de Cultura 
Económica, 1970). I refer later to Gaos’s translation of  Ideen I (México: Fondo de Cultura 
Económica, 1949). 
 6  Of interest to our story are his publications “El sujeto trascendental en Husserl,”  Anales del 
Seminario de Metafísica I (1966): 7–27, and  Estructura del conocer humano (Madrid: Gregorio 
del Toro, 1966) . 
 7  We must refer, in our context, to  El problema del ente ideal  (Madrid: Instituto Luis Vives de 
Filosofía C.S.I.C., 1948), and  La estructura de la subjetividad (Madrid-México-Buenos Aires-
Pamplona: Rialp, 1967). 
 8  Raúl Velozo, from Chile, and Alcira Bonilla, from Argentina, studied also with Rábade. 
 9  Cf. above all  La estructura del método fenomenológico (1986),  La fenomenología de Husserl 
como utopía de la razón (1987),  La fenomenología como teoría de una racionalidad fuerte. 
Estructura y función de la fenomenología de Husserl y otros ensayos (1994). San Martín has 
played also an important role in awakening awareness about the misunderstandings of the transla-
tion of  Ideen I made by Gaos. 
145
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
La práctica de la fenomenología 10 an original exposition of the vital meaning of the 
phenomenological reduction with a thorough assimilation of  Ideen I . Two disciples 
of García-Baró deserve mention: Agustín Serrano de Haro submits 11 Husserlian 
phenomenology to a systematic mereological analysis that vindicates its transcen-
dental idealism (although not necessarily with this name). Pilar Fernández Beites 12 
recognizes the methodological importance of the phenomenological reduction, but, 
based on a critique of the Husserlian separation of apodictic and adequate evidence, 
rejects the transcendental idealism in favor of a “transcendental realism.” 
 Other important works including serious considerations of  Ideen I are  Husserl y 
la crisis de la razón 13 by Isidro Gómez Romero (also a disciple of Millán Puelles), 
 Retorno a la fenomenología (1987) and  Mundo y vida en la fenomenología de 
Husserl (1994), by Fernando Montero Moliner, and  La intención comunicativa. 
Ontología e intersubjetividad en la fenomenología de Husserl (1989) by César 
Moreno Márquez. 
 In Argentina, the reception of  Ideen I initiated with  Teoría del hombre (1952) by 
Francisco Romero (1891–1962), where the notion of intentionality is used to de ﬁ ne 
human consciousness—but there is not much of assimilation of Husserl. The thesis 
of the ego as an “empty pole” worked out in  Ideen I is rejected in favor of the treat-
ment of  Cartesianische Meditationen . 14 
 The most original contribution from the period is the exploitation by Carlos 
Cossío (1903–1987) of Husserlian phenomenology, including substantially  Ideen I , 
in his in ﬂ uential  Teoría egológica del Derecho y el concepto jurídico de la libertad 
(1944). Following Ortega’s interpretation of Husserlian eidetics as a realization of 
Kant’s transcendental Aesthetics, 15 Cossío embarks in “phenomenological analy-
sis” to develop “principles”—in the sense of §153 of  Ideen I —of juridical experi-
ence.  Ideen I is also helpful to determine the central “egological thesis” of the book: 
juridical intuition is seen as a  sui generis empirical intuition of the axiological sense 
of a conduct, not as a “rational” insight. 
 Carlos Astrada, in  Idealismo fenomenológico y metafísica existencial (1936), 
and  Fenomenología y praxis (1967), interprets Husserl’s philosophical position as a 
“transcendental idealism” that accepts the Cartesian ontological postulates. Jacobo 
 10  Madrid: Trotta, 1999. 
 11  In his doctoral dissertation,  Fenomenología trascendental y ontología (1990), which, unfortu-
nately, has only been published internally by the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. 
 12  Mainly in his  Fenomenología del ser espacial (Salamanca: Publicaciones de la Universidad 
Ponti ﬁ cia de Salamanca, 1999). 
 13  Madrid: Editorial Cincel, 1986. 
 14  Known  ﬁ rst in the French translation by E. Lévinas and G. Peiffer:  Méditations cartésiennes. 
Introduction à la phénoménologie (Paris: A. Colin, 1931). In the essay “Pérdida y recuperación del 
sujeto en Husserl,”  Sur 26 (1936): 117–121, Romero deals with some epistemological ideas of 
 Ideen I and adopts the thesis of the universality of logic. 
 15  “Husserl wants to make the transcendental aesthetics of every thing; that is his eidetics,” (7) said 
Ortega in 1928 during his stay in Argentina, according to Cossío, who also  ﬁ nds support for this in 
§149 of  Ideen I . 
146
A.Z. Quijano
Kogan published (1967) a small divulgation book,  Husserl , in which he makes a 
clear exposition of central themes of  Ideen I (epochē, reduction, noema, hylē, tran-
scendental ego, etc.), and includes some paragraphs of the book in Gaos’s translation 
(§§1, 2, and 3; 27–32; 49). 
 Not being a treatise on  Ideen I ,  Genetische Phänomenologie und Reduktion. Zur 
Letztbegründung der Wissenschaft aus der radikalen Skepsis im Denken E. Husserls 
(Phaenomenologica, 1970), by Antonio Aguirre (1927–), nevertheless makes 
constant use of it at each step of the investigation, mainly in the discussion of the 
motivation of transcendental reduction and the distinction between natural and tran-
scendental attitudes. 16 
 Although not exclusively centered in  Ideen I , some works of recent scholars 
deserve mention. Roberto J. Walton (1942–), today the undisputed leader of Husserl 
scholarship in Argentina and Latin-America as a whole, has studied in “Conciencia 
de horizonte y legitimación racional” 17 the way in which a deepening in horizon-
consciousness in genetic phenomenology has in ﬂ uenced the formulation of the 
problem of the jurisdiction of reason in the fourth section of  Ideen I , and in “El 
noema como entidad abstracta” 18 has critically commented on the interpretation of 
the noema by Dag ﬁ nn Føllesdal. Julia V. Iribarne makes an analysis of phenomeno-
logical method, intentionality, and the static approach to consciousness, with inten-
sive references to  Ideen I in Chapter I (“Egological Phenomenology”) of  Edmund 
Husserl: La fenomenología comomonadología . 19 Alcira B. Bonilla, in  Mundo de la 
vida: mundo de la historia , 20 expounds with some detail the “natural concept of the 
world as described in  Ideen I. ” Finally, in his outstanding studies on the notion of 
noema, Luis Rabanaque has frequently referred to  Ideen I . 21 
 In Colombia, Danilo Cruz Vélez (1920–2008), in his  Filosofía sin supuestos. De 
Husserl a Heidegger , 22 tries to show how Husserl was locked in the metaphysics of 
subjectivity particularly because of the Cartesian way to the reduction followed in 
 Ideen I. Guillermo Hoyos Vásquez (1935–) stresses in  Intentionalität als 
Verantwortung. Geschichtsteleologie und Teleologie der Intentionalität bei Husserl 23 
the need to supplement the static stance on the I in  Ideen I with the genetic approach 
which brings about the teleology of subjectivity. In “El pensamiento husserliano 
anterior a las  Ideas ,” Daniel Herrera Restrepo (1930–) points out the continuity of 
 16  See also his discussion of the “ways to reduction” as a phenomenological critique of experience. See 
in particular § 8 of Chapter II, devoted entirely to “some aspects of the Cartesian way in  Ideas I. ”  
 17  Revista Venezolana de Filosofía 20 (1985): 87–110. 
 18  Análisis  ﬁ losó ﬁ co IX/2 (1989): 119–137. 
 19  Buenos Aires: Estudios de la Academia Nacional de Ciencias de Buenos Aires, 2002. 
 20  Buenos Aires: Biblos, 1987. 
 21  See in particular “X vacía, unidad e identidad,”  Escritos de  ﬁ losofía 15–16 (Fenomenología II, 
1992); “Hylē, Genesis, and Noema,”  Husserl Studies 19 (2003), and “Why The Noema?” 
 Phenomenology 2005 , Volume III: Selected Essays from Latin America (Zeta Books, 2007). 
 22  Buenos Aires: Sudamericana, 1970. 
 23  Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976. 
147
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
Husserl’s thought since the discovery of the  apriori of correlation in 1898. 24 Germán 
Vargas Guillén (1959–) has brought some methodological issues of the Third 
Section of  Ideen I to the study of language. 25 
 In Venezuela, an early Ernesto Mayz Vallenilla (1925–) wrote an exemplary 
book on the problem of constitution as a central issue of Husserlian epistemology, 
as developed mainly in  Ideen I ( Fenomenología del conocimiento. El problema de 
la constitución del objeto en la  ﬁ losofía de Husserl ). 26 A slighter consideration of 
 Ideen I was made by Federico Riu (1925–1985) in  Ontología del siglo XX: Husserl, 
Hartmann, Heidegger y Sartre . 27 
 In Chile, Félix Martínez Bonati (1929–) published a small but very valuable 
exposition of Husserl’s view of language, considering substantially  Ideen I :  La con-
cepción del lenguaje en la  ﬁ losofía de Husserl . 28 The doctoral dissertation of Raúl 
Velozo,  El problema de la reducción fenomenológico-trascendental en Edmund 
Husserl , 29 undertakes in its  ﬁ rst part a critical exposition of the problem of the 
reduction in  Ideen I, concluding in its intrinsic problematic character. 30 
 In Peru, besides the translations of Carlos Cueto Fernandini 31 and some early 
texts on Husserl by Alberto Wagner de Reyna (1915–), 32 attention must  ﬁ rst be paid 
to  Sentido del movimiento fenomenológico 33 by a rather young Francisco Miró 
Quesada (1918–), which examines phenomenology from the point of view of abso-
lute knowledge, and in whose two  ﬁ rst parts expounds and interprets many passages 
of  Ideen I —a work that he quotes, as does the Argentinian Cossío, by the way, from 
the English translation of 1931. 34 
 24  This essay ( Revista Franciscanum VI/18(1964): 207–235) was also in ﬂ uential for the overcom-
ing in Colombia of the interpretation of Husserl’s thought by Th. Celms. 
 25  See the Second Study (“Hacia una ontología del lenguaje”) of his  Fenomenología del ser y del 
lenguage (2003). 
 26  Caracas: Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1956. 
 27  Caracas: Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1966. 
 28  Santiago de Chile: Anales de la Universidad de Chile, 1960. 
 29  Published only internally by Universidad Complutense de Madrid in 1982. 
 30  Velozo uses many motives of  Ideen I (mainly the notion of synthesis) in his detailed study “Kant 
y Husserl” (1985), and gathers other aspects of the same work in “Ética e intersubjetividad en 
Husserl” ( Revista Venezolana de Filosofía , 39/40 (1999)). 
 31  He translated Husserl’s “Introducción a la  Lógica formal y transcendental ,”  Letras 8 (1937): 
424–36, and Levinas’s “Sobre las  Ideen de Husserl,”  Letras 6 (1937): 142–69. This last article was 
also published in another translation in Mexico years later: “Sobre  Ideas de Edmund Husserl,” 
trans. Tania Checchi González,  Revista de Filosofía 36/111 (2004): 7–41. 
 32  “La egología fundamental de Husserl, base para una fundamentación de las ciencias,”  Revista de 
la Universidad Católica del Perú 5–6 (1938): 151–65, “La refutación del psicologismo por 
Husserl,”  Revista de la Universidad Católica del Perú 12 (1944): 1–17. 
 33  Lima: Sociedad Peruana de Filosofía, 1941. 
 34  Rosemary Rizo-Patrón has made a detailed critical comment of Miró Quesada’s book in her 
essay “La  ﬁ losofía de Husserl en el Perú,”  Encuentros y desencuentros .  Estudios sobre la recep-
ción de la cultura alemana en América Latina, eds. Miguel Giusti and Horst Nitschak (Lima: 
Ponti ﬁ cia Universidad Católica del Perú, 1993), 101–172. 
148
A.Z. Quijano
 Augusto Salazar Bondy (1925–1974) labors in his doctoral dissertation from 1953 
(published as  Irrealidad e idealidad ) 35  to construct a critique of Husserl’s eidetic 
doctrine (mostly in  Ideen I ), but he does so based on serious misunderstandings. 36  
 Apart from her meticulous study of  Ideen I , 37 Rosemary Rizo-Patrón (1948–) 
merits a special mention for her pedagogical dedication to this book since 2004, a 
dedication that is having fruits in the construction of a very useful interactive 
Reading Guide of  Ideen I in “wiki” platform. 38 
 In Mexico, the rejection of José Vasconcelos (1882–1959), for whom Husserlian 
phenomenology was a mere “entertainment for ideologists,” 39 was only an extreme 
case of a rather common representation of Husserlian phenomenology as a more or 
less distorted intellectualism. Adalberto García de Mendoza (1900–1962) considers 
 Ideen I intensively in his  Lógica , 40 but serious confusions spoil his pedagogical 
intentions. Curiously,  Ideen I is not considered in  La  ﬁ losofía de Husserl , 41 by 
Antonio Caso (1883–1946). 42 In  El per ﬁ l del hombre y la cultura en México , 43 
Samuel Ramos (1897–1959) applied to Mexico Ortega’s prescription contained in 
the dictum “I am I and my circumstance, and I cannot be saved if I cannot save this 
circumstance.” So, if it be proved that Ortega was inspired by §27 of  Ideen I , “I and 
my surrounding World,” 44 we would have a clear repercussion of Husserl’s book in 
this  ﬁ rst attempt at a Mexican self-knowledge, a trend that later developed into the 
current called “Philosophy of the Mexican.” 
 Several Spanish philosophers in Mexican exile actively promoted phenomenology. 
Joaquín Xirau (1895–1946) published in 1941  La  ﬁ losofía de Husserl , 45 one of the 
 ﬁ rst global expositions in Spanish of Husserl’s philosophy, where  Ideen I is given an 
 35  Lima: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, 1958. 
 36  This has been shown by Rizo-Patrón in the essay quoted in note 34. Salazar Bondy includes 
extracts of  Logische Untersuchungen and §§ 2 and 3 of  Ideen I in his anthology  Lecturas  ﬁ losó ﬁ cas 
(Lima: Ediciones Educación Renovada, 1965). 
 37  Patent in “La actualidad de  Ideas I. Reconsideración de sus interpretaciones críticas,”  Acta 
fenomenológica latinoamericana III (2009): 79–104, and in many of her other essays. 
 38   http://wiki.pucp.edu.pe/ideas1/  (April, 2011). The Interactive Guide includes, besides a solid 
introduction to Husserl’s thought, a complete paraphrasis, paragraph after paragraph, of  Ideen I , 
with explanatory and elucidatory comments, links (substantial and hypertextual) among the differ-
ent parts of the book and with other works by Husserl, and a glossary. 
 39  See his  Lógica orgánica (México: Ediciones de El Colegio Nacional, 1945). For Vasconcelos 
phenomenology is an anachronistic essentialism and Platonism, and abstractionism far away from 
concrete life. He proposed an “inverted  epochē ” (about which we will deal in the main part of this 
chapter). 
 40  México: Ediciones Cultura, 2 vols., 1932. 
 41  México: Imprenta Mundial, 1934. 
 42  The Spanish translation by Gaos appeared in 1949, three years after Caso’s death. 
 43  México: Espasa-Calpe Mexicana, 1934. 
 44  See Mario A. Presas, “Ortega, el abandono de la fenomenología” ( Escritos de  ﬁ losofía 15–16 
(1985): 83–105), who refers to Diego Gracia’s book,  Voluntad de verdad. Para leer a Zubiri 
(Barcelona: Labor, 1986), where one can read that “without a doubt here [in §27 of  Ideen I ] we 
have the close root of the Orteguian apothegm.” 
 45  Buenos Aires: Losada. 
149
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
important share. José Gaos became a great promoter of phenomenology in Mexico, 
and, due to his translation work, 46 also in Hispano-America as a whole. His peculiar 
understanding of the phenomenological method, applied intensively within his 
Philosophy of Philosophy, included the “rule” of the conceptual clari ﬁ cation 
stipulated by Husserl in §§65 and 66 of  Ideen I . Juan David García Bacca (1901–1992) 
expounded and criticized Husserlian phenomenology in several works: Phenomen-
ology resumes for him in the disconnection of the natural attitude as formulated 
in  Ideen I , but it also embraces also the eidetic attitude: a most characteristic text of 
phenomenology is therefore the one in which Husserl af ﬁ rms that “ ‘ ﬁ ction’ consti-
tutes the vital element of phenomenology, as well as of all eidetic sciences. ” 47  
 In “Los antecedentes de la reducción fenomenológica” and “La ‘reducción a la 
inmanencia,’” 48 Luis Villoro (1925–) brings to light the continuity of  Logische 
Untersuchungen and  Ideen I as developments of the same project that attempts to 
sustain two seemingly opposing motives: objectivity of logical truth and the inten-
tional character of knowledge. 
 Gaos’s Spanish version of  Ideen I 49 has been a pillar of Husserl studies in Spanish. 
Together with his other translations of Husserl, it established a canonical vocabulary 
for the study of Husserl until this very day. Although usually considered an excel-
lent translation, the serious mistakes and misunderstandings of all kinds that it con-
tains 50 convinced me that it required a complete recasting. A new translation, under 
 46  Together with Manuel G. Morente, Gaos translated, still in Spain,  Logische Untersuchungen in 
1929, and started his translation of  Cartesianische Meditationen, published in Mexico in 1942 
without the Fifth Meditation:  Meditaciones cartesianas , trad. de José Gaos, México: Fondo de 
Cultura Económica y El Colegio de Mexico. His translation of  Ideen I was published in 1949. 
 47  The text is in § 70 of  Ideen I . García Bacca’s text is “E. Husserl y J. Joyce o Teoría y práctica de 
la actitud fenomenológica” ( Revista Filosofía y Letras , XV, 1948). See, by García Bacca,  Filosofía 
en metáforas y palabras  (1945) and  Nueve grandes  ﬁ lósofos contemporáneos y sus temas: Bergson, 
Husserl, Unamuno, Heidegger, Scheler, Hartmann, W. James, Ortega y Gasset, Whitehead (1947).  
 48  Both essays were published, with other pieces on Husserl, in  Estudios sobre Husserl (México: 
UNAM, 1975). The  ﬁ rst one was published here for the  ﬁ rst time; the second one was  ﬁ rst pub-
lished in  Diánoia XII (1966): 215–35. 
 49  Ideas relativas a una fenomenología pura y una  ﬁ losofía fenomenológica. Libro primero: 
Introducción general a la fenomenología pura , trad. José Gaos, México: Fondo de Cultura 
Económica, 1949. It was made most probably on a copy of the 1928 edition of Max Niemeyer. In 
1962 a second edition appeared, considering all the novelties (appendices, index, etc.) of the  ﬁ rst 
 Husserliana edition (Hua III, ed. W. Biemel, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1950). This 
new edition has had several printings until 1997. Gaos made a series of annotations in his copy of 
the 1928 edition of  Ideen I . The present writer brought them to light in “The marginal notes of José 
Gaos in  Ideas I ,”  Husserl Studies 12/1 (1995): 19–53. Curiously, Gaos’s version received upon 
appearing only one review, by Eli de Gortari, “Sobre  Ideas relativas a una fenomenología pura y 
una  ﬁ losofía fenomenológica ,”  Revista Filosofía y Letras XVIII/36 (1949): 370–74, who presented 
the work critically from the point of view of a radical scientism. 
 50  As already said, I was  ﬁ rst alerted about the errors in Gaos’s translation by Javier San Martín in 
personal communications. Later I compiled them in “ Ideas I en español, o de cómo armaba rompe-
cabezas José Gaos,”  Investigaciones Fenomenológicas 3 (2001): 325–71. A new compilation with 
many additions (but without commentary) can be found now in   http://www.paginasprodigy.com/
azqm/Err-I1.html  . 
150
A.Z. Quijano
my name, that deems  Ideen I not as a “classic” work (as Gaos’s translation did), but 
as a book that provides tools for a working philosophy, is now in the process of 
being printed. 51 
 On José Vasconcelos’s Inverted  Epochē and the Limits 
of Language 
 Of the several milestones in the history of the reception of  Ideas I (or even of the 
whole of Husserl’s philosophy) in the Spanish-speaking countries, none is more 
interesting—at least to my phenomenological taste—than a certain blatantly hyper-
bolic criticism proffered by José Vasconcelos in a short passage of his last philo-
sophical work. In this book, entitled  Todología , 52 Vasconcelos—one of the most 
renowned Mexican philosophers of the  ﬁ rst half of the last century, who was 70 years 
old when this book was published in 1952—intended to register the “ ﬁ nal conclu-
sions” of his experience; so we will not deal here with some  ﬂ eeting ideas or juve-
nile witticisms, but with results of a long effort to reach a wisdom that only could be 
integrated “at dusk.” 53 This is an important warning of the seriousness of his critical 
proposal, even if he presents it as a “trick” or as an “astuteness”; but my concern 
here is not Vasconcelos’s philosophy or wisdom, nor even the dubious soundness of 
his critique of Husserlian phenomenology, but only the way in which his proposal 
contrasts with the idea and the program of this phenomenology, and, above all, the 
way in which, paradoxically, it might incite and encourage an investigation of a kind 
(a phenomenological kind, of course) that he believed to be utterly misguided. From 
a historical point of view, it is interesting to observe that the accusation of logicism 
and intellectualism that the Vasconcelian criticism implies is just an extreme case of 
one of the most common tendencies in the reception of Husserl’s works in Mexico 
and most of the Spanish-speaking countries. 
 The criticism in question is embedded in the proposal of an “inverted  epochē ” 
and a “paradisiac thinking.” Vasconcelos presents it early in his book as a tricky way 
to put the reader in one stroke within the world-view that can be deduced, so he 
says, from the combined knowledge of physical experience, reason, aesthetic expe-
rience, and mystic experience or revelation. Although Husserl is mentioned in the 
 51  It has been made on the second  Husserliana edition of  Ideen I (Hua III/1 and III/2) by Karl 
Schuhmann, and therefore it includes many texts that were lacking in Gaos’s version. The new 
translation will appear in a coedition of UNAM and Fondo de Cultura Económica, the editorial 
house that has been publishing the  ﬁ rst version. The terminology of  Ideen I is extensively included 
in the multilingual  Glosario-Guía para Traducir a Husserl (  http://www.ggthusserl.org  ) and the 
work has been also considered in the project of a bilingual Husserl Dictionary (  http://www.dic-
cionariohusserl.org  ). 
 52  México: Ediciones Botas. 
 53  See the Prologue to  Todología , in  Obras completas , Vol. IV (México: Libreros Mexicanos 
Unidos, 1961), 817. 
151
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
exposition, Vasconcelos does not refer to any one of his works. A translation of 
 Cartesianische Meditationen was published in Spanish in 1942, and the  ﬁ rst book 
of the  Ideen in 1949, 54 just 3 years before  Todología (both in José Gaos’s translation). 
It is safe to assume that with his reading of  Ideen I , cursory as it should have been, 
Vasconcelos con ﬁ rmed his long-standing view on Husserlian phenomenology as an 
“entertainment of ideologists,” 55 and decided to take, with the proposal of an 
“inverted  epochē, ” a vigorous measure against it. 
 His proposal consists in “invert, in our bene ﬁ t—Vasconcelos’ words—the funda-
mental hypothesis of Husserl,” that is, the “phenomenological reduction,” which 
consists in a “mental effort that disregards the physical reality, puts it in brackets, to 
occupy itself at once with concepts and only concepts. This odd method leads to the 
curious aberration of replacing the living world of nature with a mediocre concep-
tual imagery devoid of life....” 56 
 It is worthwhile to quote it in full:
  We will use a philosophical license … that will allow us to bracket all the ideological 
structure of ideas and dialectics, to attempt a thought without ideas, made only of images. 
We will reach reality in direct intuition, disregarding the universals which are of current 
use; we will contemplate the concrete tree, without any reference to its genera. I do not 
analyze whether it is a pine or a palm; I elude all classi ﬁ cations: I look at a robust tree at the 
center of a meadow; I don’t think in other meadows, I impress in my mind the particular tree 
surrounded by grass, the only grass that I am looking at, and in a similar particularization, 
I go over the walls that limit the garden and ascend with the gaze to the  ﬁ rmament … 
 If I stop and think of the tree, the meadow, the houses, I leave the living reality and enter 
into the world of ideas; I imitate then the photographic camera that is incapable of following 
the living miracle of being, a being that dies when it becomes an abstraction, and lives again 
only when it shines, singular and concrete. 
 Living within the concrete …, I take part in a life that, lacking another name, I have 
entitled paradisiac,  ﬁ guring that this is the way the world was seen by Adam and Eve, 
before the sin. Because the sin, while limiting the faculties of consciousness, obliged us to 
build those apparatuses of reduction, glasses for myopia which are the abstract voices that 
I am obliged to use when I say tree, a name that embraces a multiplicity of diverse vegetables, 
and what I would like to express and remember is this tree, speci ﬁ c and unique, which is the 
object of my complacency. 57 
 We can convince ourselves, I guess, that there is no need to recover the lost para-
dise in order to live life in, so to speak, individual and concrete terms, and that the 
idea that it was a sin that obliged us to use concepts, or conceptual meanings, to com-
municate to each other our experiences, is, to say the least, very risky. On the other 
hand, it is certainly revealing of Vasconcelos’s understanding of phenomenology that 
what seems to be no more than a veri ﬁ cation of a limitation essential to language, 
turns into a criticism of a phenomenology based on reduction, charging it with some-
thing that lies already at the heart of linguistic communication. But there is more. 
 54  See notes 46 and 49. 
 55  Vasconcelos,  Lógica orgánica , in  Obras completas , Vol. IV, p. 496. 
 56  Todología , ed. cit., p. 856. 
 57  Todología , ed. cit., 856–58. 
152
A.Z. Quijano
 Along with this criticism, he longs for “a language that would have a name for 
everything (which is what is fair, because there are not two things equal in the creation); 
and an in ﬁ nity of names in correspondence with the in ﬁ nity of beings.” 58 As long as 
I do not possess this language, I see myself obliged to abbreviate, to simplify, and 
come up with signs that sacri ﬁ ce singularity, speci ﬁ city and individuality of mil-
lions of beings, and do not come to “designate the precise tree of that day and that 
hour.” 59 “And I say man with pain, because it is not fair to reduce to an abstraction 
not even the most humble of these beings …” 60 This discomfort of Vasconcelos with 
the “idealism” that language involves, and his craving for “something like a telepa-
thy to reveal with loyalty the most humble of our perceptions,” 61 along with the 
“paradisiac thought,” which consists in the “possibility of distinguishing the multi-
tude of the creations, associating them with the multitude of words that probably 
God employed to engender them,” 62 might undoubtedly bring a very acute con-
sciousness of the essential limitations of language, and give impulse to develop 
what Fritz Mauthner called a “critique of language.” Of course, for Vasconcelos 
would have been a real setback to discover that such a demarcation of the limits of 
language could be made with the help of phenomenology, and to a certain extent 
with the phenomenology whose program is established in  Ideen I . 
 It is unnecessary to emphasize what the proposal of Vasconcelos to have “an 
in ﬁ nity of names in correspondence to the in ﬁ nity of beings” 63 really implies. Given 
the differences on the tree from a moment to the next, considering “its relationships, 
its proportions, its lights, and what my emotion and my memory add to the view,” 64 
we would need in fact, only for this one tree (which is “one,” and “tree,” only for our 
old language), as many names as the number of possible adumbrations under which 
we can have an intuition of it. But these adumbrations would not be only perceptual, 
but also emotional, associative, relational, and so forth… Now, the same would be 
for the meadow, for the walls, the sky or each patch of sky, the grass or each leaf of 
grass, etcetera, etcetera. In sum, because there are no two identical intuitions, or two 
identical moments of intuition, we would need a name for each object under each 
one of the momentary intuitions or lived experiences that we would have of it. The 
result is the idea of a vocabulary of a totally unruly vastness. And there are still 
some restrictions to avoid and some dimensions of variability to integrate in the 
proposal. But I will let things rest at this point. 
 It is rather clear that this idea of an inverted  epochē , with its paradisiac thought, 
is not very fruitful as a real possibility of a new kind of language, and of a thought 
made with that language. A language that cannot make use of common names 
 58  Ibid., 858. 
 59  Ibid. 
 60  Ibid. 
 61  Ibid. 
 62  Ibid., 859. 
 63  Ibid., 858. 
 64  Ibid., 857. 
153
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
cannot function as a language. But perhaps Vasconcelos is pointing in an opposite 
direction. Perhaps his elimination of all generalization does not try to substitute one 
language with another, but to show us the way that reality looks if we look at it with 
no language at all. Or in other words, perhaps he is trying to avoid linguistic gener-
alizations just to expound what must remain, as inexpressible, outside of language. 
I will explore this conjecture, but not from within the thought and works of 
Vasconcelos, but with the help of Husserlian phenomenology. A complete study 
would require much more that  Ideen I , but I will stick here to  Ideen I . 
 Husserl introduces formally the theme of expression and signi ﬁ cation in §124. 
This is, as is well-known, a new stratum over the basic stratum of the acts that, as 
such, possess, before or independently of their possible expression, a sense, a more 
or less explicated sense. The new stratum of expression is in fact a bilateral stratum, 
given the need to distinguish its corporeal or sensuous side (the verbal sound) from 
its non-sensuous or non-corporeal side (the side of signi ﬁ cation proper). Like 
Husserl, I will not consider here the relation between these two sides, the form of 
their union, etc. I refer all my comments only to the non-sensuous side of the 
signi ﬁ cation proper, because for them it is indifferent if a verbal sound (or a written 
or gestural sign) is present or given or not. 
 What is proper to expressing, that is, to signifying, resides in giving “conceptual 
imprint,” or the peculiar form of “conceptuality” to the noematic sense of an act and 
to its reference to an objectivity. I will suppose that this is well understood. I per-
ceive a blackbird that starts  ﬂ ying and say, or I only think, meaningfully, “There 
 ﬂ ies a blackbird!” as in the well-known example of the Sixth Logical Investigation. 
As long as here, in the exposition of the example, I had to imprint conceptually the 
perceptual noema to express it when I referred to it in its pre-expressed condition 
(saying precisely “I perceive a blackbird that starts  ﬂ ying…”), every possible dis-
agreement or discrepancy between this perceptual noema, as yet not expressed, or 
the perception as such, and its expression, remains hidden. This expression, as 
Husserl remembers, may even take the name of  expressed (or “ expressive, ” as 
Kersten translates)  perception , due to the fact that there is a coincidence in essence 
between the expressive stratum and the stratum subject to the expression. This not-
withstanding, Husserl remarks with a certain emphasis how little justice has been 
rendered by the literature (in his time, of course) to the great problems concerning 
the relationship between the “expressive mental processes” and the “non-expressive 
ones,” and “what the latter undergo in supervening expressings.” 65 Among such 
problems, Husserl mentions above all the distinction between this sense and the 
essential moments which lie in the pre-expressed, and the signi ﬁ cation of the expres-
sive phenomenon itself and its own moments. We are all aware of the distance, so to 
say, that lies between the senses of the singular perception of the blackbird that 
 65  Hua III/1, 287;  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy, First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology , trans. F. Kersten 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1982), 296. (I abbreviate this edition as “ Ideas. ” In 
some quotes I modify the translation slightly.) 
154
A.Z. Quijano
starts its  ﬂ ight, and the signi ﬁ cation con ﬁ ned in its expression, or the signi ﬁ cation 
of this expression as such. It can be said that all problems or issues discussed or 
programmatically introduced in the remaining paragraphs on expression or  logos , 
touch in one way or another this vast and important issue of the relationship between 
the stratum of the pre-expressed sense and the stratum of the expression or, more 
precisely, of the signi ﬁ cation of the expression. This is also the space where my 
contribution will be situated. 
 §126 66 is devoted in its entirety to the issues of the generality and the complete-
ness of the expression. Husserl mentions in the  ﬁ rst place the lack of completeness 
that consists in the fact that the expression  stamps in a conceptual-signi ﬁ cational 
way only a part of the synthetical forms and materials of the substratum (of the 
sense to be expressed). In the Husserlian example of the shouting to the house “The 
carriage! The guests!” 67 the “whole substratum” of lived senses that are searching 
expression is much more complex than the mere perceptual sense of the perception 
of the carriage plus the non-intuitive sense of the representation of the guests (which 
are inside the carriage and not yet visible). We let aside this kind of incompleteness, 
which Husserl treats as accidental, because we cannot  ﬁ nd in it any threat to the capa-
bilities of language, that is, any sample of its limits. We can always feign the complete 
expression that corresponds with the incomplete one; for instance: “The carriage 
that I am quite sure is carrying the guests for whom we have been waiting is  ﬁ nally 
approaching the house,” or something like that. So we will deal in what follows only 
with complete expressions (either real or simulated), that is, in Husserl’s words, 
with expressions where the expressive superstratum is expressively extended over 
the whole substratum. 
 The main incompleteness of expression, because it is essential, is the one brought 
about by its  generality or  universality ( Allgemeinheit ), whereas all lived experi-
ences, even the ones that refer to a generality, are singular, individual, unique, even 
though they can be classi ﬁ ed by a more or less general kind or type. This classi ﬁ cation, 
of which Husserl gives some examples, is not of interest for us now. Much more 
interesting for us is the following apparently obvious corollary of the essential 
incompleteness of the expression: “Everything determined more precisely in the 
unity of expression is itself again expressed universally.” 68 This means that if I 
would like to complete the expression (say, “There  ﬂ ies a blackbird!”) of my per-
ception, with the expression of some particularities of the perception, this expres-
sion would be in its turn also universal: “There  ﬂ ies with sudden impetus a beautiful 
white-collared blackbird.” The beauty, the collar and its whiteness, the impetus and 
its suddenness, do not pertain only to this individual blackbird. Even the expression 
“This blackbird” has not an individual range of application or use. This, which 
 66  I am leaving aside §125, about the modalities of the effectuation and the method of clari ﬁ cation, 
even though these issues might prove in the long run very important for our research. 
 67  Hua III/1, 291;  Ideas , 299. 
 68  Ibid.;  Ideas , 300. 
155
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
of course is not a theoretical novelty, is phenomenologically expressed in this way: 
“It is inherent in the sense of the universality belonging to the essence of expressing 
that all the particulars of the expressed can never be re ﬂ ected in the expression. The 
stratum of signifying is not, and of essential necessity cannot be, a kind of redupli-
cation of the substratum.” 69 
 Now, here we have a real limit of language. And it is precisely this limit that the 
proposal of Vasconcelos tried to break with the inverted  epochē . But let us explore 
in little more detail the alternative to the Vasconcelos’s proposal for dealing with the 
universality of language if for some reason one dislikes it. What happens with that 
attempt, apparently rational and allowed by Husserl, of working in the more detailed 
determination of the expressed substratum, in new expressions, which, although 
still general, would individualize or particularize the expression further and further? 
“There in the corn- ﬁ eld, at about 50 yards from this place, and against a deep blue 
sky devoid of clouds,  ﬂ ies with sudden impetus a quite rare for these lands but also 
quite beautiful white-collared blackbird!” Proceeding in this way, we would be cov-
ering with signi ﬁ cation and expressivity more of the elements of sense (or elements 
of the noema) of the lived-experience which is here the substratum at each step. Our 
route would be in fact very similar, or even essentially the same, to the one we fol-
lowed when we were looking—within Vasconcelos’s proposal—for every bit of 
reality experienced to which we could assign a name in order to forge a language 
without general terms; only that this time we are not building an in ﬁ nite vocabulary 
for an in ﬁ nite reality, but just using our real language for describing in its general 
terms that very reality in an each time more precise and particular way. Even if the 
Vasconcelian plan of naming with a proper name, individually, all things that we 
can  ﬁ nd in our experience, as minutely and variously determined as possible, goes 
against the general essence of language, and the other plan of an each time more 
detailed description and expression of the experience avows at every step the very 
nature of language, there is indeed a common core in both tasks, and it would be 
very interesting to explore this core and also to bring to light their differences. 
 Both enterprises are  in the end absolutely unfeasible in the sense that they can 
perhaps start, but they cannot be carried out until the end—if there is some end. To 
follow the stream of experience, swimming along with it, to use a Husserlian expres-
sion, in order either to express all its particularities in general terms (in the “ratio-
nal” option) or to give them individual names (in the Vasconcelian proposal), is an 
impossible task, if not for other reasons, simply because it takes more time to express 
or to name than to live the experiences themselves. Perhaps there is even an in ﬁ nite 
regress involved in the task, since during the time of the expression or the naming 
we would be also experiencing, and we would need to express or name all particulars 
which this experiencing brings with it, and so on  in in ﬁ nitum . But what if we remain 
with just one experience, or with an instant of an experience? This would be a harsh 
limitation for Vasconcelos, but there is no other way to absorb in our language 
the whole of the living experience than effecting in it an arti ﬁ cial limitation to an 
 69  Ibid.; ibid. 
156
A.Z. Quijano
instantaneous or to a very short affair: my perception of this tree here in this meadow 
right now and just now, my perception of the blackbird that starts to  ﬂ y right now 
and right there in front of me. 
 We have arrived to our point of departure. The question is if there is not also 
some intrinsic impossibility in the complete and exhaustive expression of a single 
lived experience arti ﬁ cially limited to one living present—or in the exhaustive naming 
of all its parts and moments. When Husserl states the dictum of the expressibility of 
all acts, he refers explicitly to acts, not to all intentional lived-experiences. But even 
in acts, not all is expressible, but only the noematic nucleus… 70 This is a serious 
limitation, because outside of the noematic nucleus there remain a lot of things. 
All horizons, for instance (a very important instance), lie outside the noematic 
nucleus. But this limitation perhaps is not as drastic as it may seem, because, as is 
recognized also by Husserl, all living experience which is not an act may be con-
verted into an act, and in this way becomes also expressible. Therefore, if we can 
allow the time suf ﬁ cient for this conversion of potential lived-experiences and its 
correlates into acts, then there still do not seem to be some intrinsic impossibility in 
the expression of any lived-experience. 
 Husserl himself points in an interesting direction. Right after stating that the 
stratum of signifying cannot be a reduplication of the substratum, he adds: “Whole 
dimensions of variability in the substratum do not enter at all into the expressive 
signifying; they, or their correlates, do not indeed ‘express themselves’ at all: thus 
the modi ﬁ cations of relative clarity and distinctness, the attentional modi ﬁ cations, 
and so forth.” 71 It seems clear to me that these factors of the sense of an experience 
cannot reach expression when I am giving expression to the noematic nucleus as 
such. “There  ﬂ ies a blackbird!” does not tell at the same time the relative clarity 
with which it is given, or the degree of attention put in it. But I cannot see any objec-
tion to the possibility that these factors can indeed be made objects of new re ﬂ ective 
acts, and in this way be expressed, even though always with a certain degree of 
indeterminacy. I will say, for instance, that I saw the  ﬂ ight of the blackbird (in that 
past experience previously expressed) in full clarity, or in a somewhat blurry view, 
or very attentively, or almost distracted, out of the corner of the eye, etc. Many other 
features in an experience cannot reach a more precise and determinate expression, 
just as the clarity or the attentiveness of the experience. The color, for instance, its 
exact shading or nuance, for which Husserl once recognized that we usually lacked 
the names. I said “a white-collared blackbird”, but was it a pure white, or a some-
what grayish white, or it had some yellowish tone? Et cetera. In short, all these factors 
or elements seem to be particularities or peculiarities of the experience that could be 
expressed (with the normal indeterminacy of practically all expressions) when we 
advance in the process of a more determined and precise expression. They are only 
relative ineffabilities. 
 70  See Hua III/1, 271 and 286. 
 71  Hua III/1, 291;  Ideas , 300. 
157
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
 I will discuss, very brie ﬂ y, some recent theses advanced by Husserlian scholars 
concerning some peculiar experiences that they call “private.” Rochus Sowa 72 has 
proposed that the species of sensible sentiments, like pain, in contradistinction 
with the species from the sphere of the optical, the acoustical, etc., are essentially 
private in spite of its ideality as species. I can discuss (agree or disagree) with oth-
ers about the difference between two colors that I see, but not about the difference 
of two pains that I feel. Now, I would reply that, even though both experiences are 
subjective and individual, both of them have also their ways to render their con-
tents, or their correlates (the species of pain or of color, etc.), intersubjective. The 
external or public identi ﬁ cation of colors hides the essential fact that I cannot see 
the color from the other’s perception, so the identi ﬁ cation of the color cannot come 
from the fact that I can really compare my color with the color of the other. I cannot 
enter into the ways to overcome this impossibility or the parallel impossibility in 
the case of pain. But these ways exist. Otherwise, we could not explain the fact of 
everyday life that we can talk about having or not exactly the same pain (meaning 
of course the same species of pain). Also, a scientist or a doctor can, on the basis 
of his scienti ﬁ c, medical knowledge, contest the intensity or the nature of a pain 
that a patient claims to have. Certainly he can be wrong. But disagreement and 
agreement in this regard are possible. 
 Pains, then, are not as such ineffable. Lanei Rodemeyer presents a similar (but 
somewhat disappointing) case. 73 Even if she asks, very pertinently: “how does phe-
nomenology answer the issue of  meanings for which there are no words, ” 74 her 
treatment makes it clear that she refers to meanings, or senses,  for which there are 
still no words . This is still interesting, but it is not our question about a possible 
insurmountable obstacle to take some sense or combination of senses to the level of 
expression. This is our question, and the existence in consciousness of some still 
anonymous “embodied meanings” (new or strange corporeal sensations and the 
like) that after some intersubjective and linguistic process  ﬁ nd their place in lan-
guage, has not yet given us an answer. 
 If we cannot  ﬁ nd some particular sense, some particular determination of 
experience, that must remain as a matter of principle exempted of language, then 
it seems that the more precise and detailed determination of an experience (of 
 any experience), of which Husserl thought, could proceed in principle forever 
without  ﬁ nding anything refractory to expression. And I want to submit here the 
hypothesis that in fact we could not  ﬁ nd it. To clarify this in a detailed manner 
 72  Rochus Sowa, “Deiktische Ideationen. Über die mit den Wörter ‘dies’ und ‘so’ vollziehbaren 
okkasionellen Bezugnahmen auf ideale Gegenständlichkeiten,”  Meaning and Language: 
Phenomenological Perspectives , Phaenomenologica, 187, ed. Philip Mattens (Dordrecht: Springer, 
2008), 105–23. 
 73  Lanei M. Rodemeyer, “‘I Don’t Have the Words.’ Considering Language (and the Lack Thereof) 
Through the Phenomenological Paradigms of Temporality and Corporeality,”  Meaning and 
Language: Phenomenological Perspectives , 195–212. 
 74  Ibid., 195–96. 
158
A.Z. Quijano
would require of course some more phenomenology than the bit that I have 
displayed here. We still have not shown, for instance, why feelings or emotions, 
or moods, which are usually credited with a solid ineffability, are not really inef-
fable. But the question of their expressibility, as well as the expressibility of any 
other feature or item in experience, either a noetic or a noematic sense or a part 
thereof, is, broadly said, the same as the one concerning pain, which is already a 
sensible feeling. That is, it can also be reduced to the question of whether the 
feeling or emotion, or its noematic correlate, can be lived, or “had” in a lived-
experience, by another and not only by myself, that is, if it can be considered as 
intersubjective or not. 
 This question in turn implies this other question: if it can be apprehended ideally 
as a species. We include here not only the easily identi ﬁ able (and already baptized) 
sentiments such as joy, sadness, enthusiasm, etc., but also all sorts of subjective 
moods or states, for instance those caused by the ingestion of alcohol or drugs. 
No doubt, names can be lacking in many cases, as in Rodemeyer’s example, but 
the question is if the feeling, the mood, or the state about which we are talking 
about can in principle be identi ﬁ ed by more than one person, no matter how 
long or dif ﬁ cult the process of detection and identi ﬁ cation would be. The fact that 
the expression of any non-doxic lived-experience cannot be itself non-doxic 
and involves a doxic detour is a peculiarity that does not contravenes its 
expressibility. 
 Are we then to conclude that there are no real or  absolute ineffability , that we 
can only encounter  relative ineffabilities  like all those features of an act neglected, 
and even necessary neglected, in a particular expression? We just linked the ques-
tion of expressibility to the question of the possibility of “sharing” an experience 
or a sense with another. An absolute ineffability would be something absolutely 
individual, something absolutely incapable of being shared. Along with the above 
hypothesis, I submit here the thesis that there is such something, and it is life 
itself. Life itself, just as we live it at every moment, is absolutely individual and 
 einmalig , and therefore absolutely ineffable. Every single  Erlebnis , however pass-
ing or poor, however humble or modest, of every single subject of consciousness, 
is, in the way it is concretely lived, and as long as we leave its integrity intact, 
inexpressible. 
 I assume that the invitation of Vasconcelos to see reality, or our experience of it, 
with other eyes than the eyes of conceptual language, is an invitation to see all 
things in their pristine, non-conceptual relation to this our own life, that is, the life 
that is always lived in full  Erlebnisse , not in the nuclear sense alone with its noe-
matic core alone. And I cannot  ﬁ nd better eyes to look at it than the eyes of phenom-
enology. It is phenomenology that describes expression as expression of the noematic 
core of an  Erlebnis , the discipline that can also approach and describe a full  Erlebnis 
as such and uncover its absolute ineffability. 
 The ineffability of life as lived, and of its correlates, is the only absolute ineffa-
bility that I can  ﬁ nd, or at least, and this is an important quali ﬁ cation, the only 
159
9 The Spanish-Speaking World and José Vasconcelos
absolute ineffability that I am sure that phenomenology can describe. I will not 
myself make any statements about some other possible ineffabilities found in some 
experiences of an extraordinary and exceptional character, like those suggested in 
mystic writings or other kind of religiously or metaphysically inspired literature. 
About the authenticity of these suggestions or intimations, I will not say a word, and 
I will also not say anything about the possibility that phenomenology can approach 
those experiences. 
 I must still escape from a pair of misunderstandings. First: if I say that all parts 
or moments in the full noema or the full  Erlebnis are only relative ineffabilities, why 
is it that their sum is not only relatively ineffable, but absolutely so? Can I not, at 
least in idea, express one after the other the complete repertory of a complete 
 Erlebnis , and in this way express it, not perhaps in a single and completely integral 
expression, but in a series of continuous steps? The answer is that the elements of 
an  Erlebnis  form a combination, a composite whole which is absolutely unique and 
 einmalig . It is this uniqueness and  Einmaligkeit , the absolute singularity of this 
composition in the  Erlebnis , what makes it impossible that it be lived by other, or 
even that it might be lived again by one self. Furthermore, this resulting composi-
tion, that is, each  Erlebnis as such, as lived, impresses passively the ego that lives it, 
and leaves in it a trace, and this impression or trace has also a noematic correlate 
which is also absolutely unique (something that I have called in other texts the “col-
oring of life”). 75 
 And second: every single thing, object, state of affairs, of whatsoever category or 
dimension, and in spite of being experienced as an instance of a kind or type in 
whatever level of generality, is always for me a correlate of a full  Erlebnis , of my 
integral life, and as such it has a character or a quality stamped in it (passively, of 
course) that makes it also ineffable. So, not only my life, but also each and every 
“thing” within my life, and the world as a whole and in every one of its parts, is, so 
considered, also ineffable, just because it cannot have in or for any other life the 
same character it has in and for mine. We can make expressions about all of them in 
the exact measure in which we can detach them from our individuality, from 
our personality. Expression and conceptualization mean de-individualization, de-
personalization. Some things resist quite well: other persons, above all their faces, 
their gestures and postures…, only in extreme situations can all that lose its own 
individuality in our dealings with it. 
 All this, I am afraid, is nothing new. And this is perhaps one of those phenom-
enological insights that at  ﬁ rst sight have the air of something rather trivial or 
 75  See on this “Sobre el colorido de la vida. Ensayo de caracterización preliminary,”  Acta 
Fenomenológica Latinoamericana , Vol. I (Lima: Ponti ﬁ cia Universidad Católica de Perú, Fondo 
Editorial, 2003), 209–21; and “El resplandor de la afectividad,”  Acta Fenomenológica 
Latinoamericana , Vol. III (Lima, Perú / Morelia, México, Ponti ﬁ cia Universidad Católica del Perú 
/ Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo, 2009), 139–53. 
160
A.Z. Quijano
super ﬁ cial. But I still have not seen—of course this can be due to my scarce 
phenomenological culture—the phenomenological detailed exposition of this 
phenomenological insight. So, even though there is still much work to do just to 
clarify the idea and the goals of this very research, 76  I think that there is here the 
opening of a legitimate avenue of research for phenomenology. Let this essay be 
a suggestive start.  
 76  Besides the careful exposition of what was here said brie ﬂ y, what is also needed is,  ﬁ rst of all, a 
complete classi ﬁ cation of all relative ineffabilities, with an exposition of the reasons of their being 
so, and also the study of the ways in which their ineffability may be and is effectively surmounted. 
But mostly needed is the description of concrete life as an ineffable stream of experiences, as the 
land where language grows and gets cultivated, so a phenomenology of language can be adequately 
rooted. It is also needed, for obvious reasons, to link this research with the research on 
intersubjectivity. 
161
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_10, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Abstract   The ﬁ rst part of this chapter provides a brief sketch of the publishing 
history of  Ideen   I in Italy. The most inﬂ uential philosopher in the publishing history 
of Husserl’s work in Italy was Enzo Paci, professor at the State University of Milan. 
Like his teacher Antonio Banﬁ  (who ﬁ rst brought Husserl’s work to Italy), he is con-
sidered one of the founders of the so-called Milan School. The second part of the 
chapter considers Paci’s transcendental philosophy, and in particular his original inter-
pretation of the Husserlian epochē. Paci gives an existential interpretation of the 
epochē, conceived as an act “required by life itself.” It recognizes four elements in 
Paci’s version of the epochē: ﬁ rst, the epochē is a denial of abstract mundane data; 
second, it allows a poetic intuition of the cosmic form of experience; third, it deter-
mines the assumption of responsibility toward the world; and fourth, it is the ﬁ rst and 
essential political action.  
 A Historical Introduction 
 In 2002, a new edition of Husserl’s  Ideen I , edited by Elio Franzini and translated 
by Vincenzo Costa, 1 was published. In that same year, together with Paolo 
Spinicci, they published  La fenomenologia , 2 an important and complete intro-
duction to the work of Edmund Husserl. These two events mark a turning point in 
Husserlian studies in Italy. A new translation was needed because, as is explained 
 Chapter 10 
 Ideen I  in Italy and Enzo Paci 
 Rocco  Sacconaghi  
 R.  Sacconaghi (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Boston College ,  Chestnut Hill ,  MA ,  USA 
e-mail:  r.sacconaghi@gmail.com 
 1  Edmund Husserl,  Idee per una fenomenologia pura e per una  ﬁ loso ﬁ a fenomenologica, vol. I, 
Libro Primo, Introduzione generale alla fenomenologia pura , ed. E. Franzini, trans. V. Costa 
(Turin: Einaudi, 2002). 
 2  V. Costa, E. Franzini, and P. Spinicci,  La fenomenologia (Turin: Einaudi, 2002). 
162
R. Sacconaghi
in the translator’s preface, old text was “outdated and unful ﬁ lling from a philological 
point of view.” 3  
 In fact, the same year that the  ﬁ rst Italian translation was made by Giulio Alliney 
(1950) on the basis of the  ﬁ rst two German editions (1922 and 1928), a new German 
version of  Ideen I was published. Edited by Walter Biemel, the original text had 
Husserl’s own comments inserted later, which expands and sometimes replaces 
some of his original wording. A new Italian translation based on Biemel’s edition 
was then made by Enrico Filippini in 1965. But a few years later (1976), the Husserl 
Archive decided to publish yet another version of  Ideen I , in which the original text 
was restored and Husserl’s annotations and additions were included in another volume. 
Then, Costa writes, “ ﬁ rst of all, it was necessary to once again present to Italian 
public the original text of  Ideen I .” 4 
 Nevertheless, Filippini’s translation played an important role in the Italian renais-
sance of Husserlian studies in the early 1960s, both as a “symptom” and as an “active 
agent.” A book came out in 1960 which was symbolic of this Husserlian renaissance: 
 Omaggio a Husserl , 5 edited by Enzo Paci, 6 then professor at the State University of 
Milan. This book collected essays written by major protagonists of this renaissance 
(S. Vanni-Rovighi, G.D. Neri, E. Melandri, L. Lugarini, G. Semerari, etc.) and an 
essay by the one who  ﬁ rst brought Husserl to Italy, Antonio Ban ﬁ , 7 Paci’s professor, 
who had died in 1957 (he was one of the most important  ﬁ gures of the so-called 
 3  V. Costa, “Sulla storia editoriale di  Idee I e sui criteri di questa edizione,” Editor’s Preface, E. 
Husserl,  Idee per una fenomenologia pura e per una  ﬁ loso ﬁ a fenomenologica, vol. I, Libro Primo, 
Introduzione generale alla fenomenologia pura , LV. See also V. Costa, “La posizione di  Idee I nel 
pensiero di Husserl,” ibid., 435–64. Costa is one of the most lively protagonists of the Italian phe-
nomenological milieu. He wrote several essays and books about phenomenology and in particular 
on Husserl. Among others:  L’estetica trascendentale fenomenologica. Sensibilità e razionalità 
nella  ﬁ loso ﬁ a di Edmund Husserl (Milan: Vita e Pensiero, 1999);  Il cerchio e l’ellisse. Husserl e il 
darsi delle cose (Soveria Mannelli: Rubbettino, 2007); and  Husserl (Rome: Carocci, 2009). 
 4  V. Costa, “Sulla storia editoriale di  Idee I e sui criteri di questa edizione,” ibid. 
 5  Enzo Paci, ed.,  Omaggio a Husserl (Milan: Il Saggiatore, 1960). 
 6  His most important works on Husserl are: E. Paci,  Tempo e verità nella fenomenologia di Husserl , 
(Laterza: Bari, 1961); and  Funzione delle scienze e signi ﬁ cato dell’uomo (Milan: Il Saggiatore, 
1963;  The Function of the Sciences and Meaning of Man , trans. J.E. Hanse and P. Piccolone 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1972). On his philosophy, see A. Vigorelli, 
 L’esistenzialismo positivo di Enzo Paci. Una biogra ﬁ a intellettuale (1929–1950) (Milan: Franco 
Angeli, 1987); A. Vigorelli, “La fenomenologia husserliana nell’opera di Enzo Paci,”  Magazzino 
di  ﬁ loso ﬁ a II/5 (2001): 169–95; S. Zecchi, ed.,  Vita e verità. Interpretazione del pensiero di Enzo 
Paci (Milan: Bompiani, 1991). For a complete bibliography of Paci’s work, see A. Civita, 
 Bibliogra ﬁ a degli scritti di Enzo Paci (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1983); A. Vigorelli, “Rassegna: 
Bibliogra ﬁ a,”  Il Verri 9–10 (1986): 204–208. 
 7  Ban ﬁ ’s  ﬁ rst articles on Husserl are: “La tendenza logistica della  ﬁ loso ﬁ a tedesca contemporanea 
e le ‘ Ricerche logiche ’ di Edmund Husserl,”  Rivista di  ﬁ loso ﬁ a XIV/2 (1923): 115–33; and “La 
fenomenologia pura di Edmund Husserl e l’autonomia ideale della sfera teoretica,”  Rivista di 
 ﬁ loso ﬁ a XIV/3 (1923): 208–24. On Ban ﬁ ’s introduction of phenomenology to Italy, see M. Mocchi, 
 Le prime interpretazioni della  ﬁ loso ﬁ a di Husserl in Italia. Il dibattito sulla fenomenologia: 1923–
1940 (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1990); S. Zecchi, “La fenomenologia in Italia, Diffusione e inter-
pretazioni,”  Filoso ﬁ a italiana e  ﬁ loso ﬁ e straniere nel dopoguerra , eds. P. Rossi and C. A. Viano 
(Bologna: Il Mulino, 1991), 15–33. 
163
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
“Milan School.” 8 ) It was Paci who told Filippini to translate  Ideen I using Biemel’s 
text as the principal source. For the same reasons, he asked Filippini to translate Gerd 
Brand on the late Husserlian manuscripts and the  Krisis . 9 As Costa writes, “Biemel’s 
editorial decision is rooted in a particular context, de ﬁ ned by a revival of Husserlian 
studies that tended to favor the later developments of Husserl’s phenomenology, in 
order to reveal a sort of ‘new’ Husserl.” 10  This was Paci’s intent as well:
 Milan, September 10, 1958. My attempt is to in ﬂ uence Italian philosophy and culture 
through phenomenology. Mine is a “relational” phenomenology that would take account of 
the entire history of phenomenological thought and overcome existentialism. The central 
points are:  time , as it was conceived by Husserl already in 1904–1905, and  relation , as it 
appears in the  ﬁ fth  Cartesianische Meditation and in the  Krisis . 11 
 Now,  time  and  intersubjective relation are issues that Husserl treated when 
he wrote  Ideen I , but their implications in  Ideen I are still hidden, not explicit. 
In this sense, Paci states that “the reasons for this rebirth of Husserl’s thought” 
are to be found in “the publication of the Husserlian unpublished works,” because 
“the present culture needed Husserl and, in particular,  Die Krisis der europäischen 
Wissenschaften .” 12  Paci then interpreted  Ideen I as a fundamental but un ﬁ nished 
introduction to phenomenology, not yet able to grasp the full concreteness of human 
experience: “Phenomenology, between the two World Wars, has remained on the 
level of  Ideen I , i.e., in the stage in which Husserl has elaborated the  eidetic per-
spective … Now, phenomenology is an analysis of essences, but essences have a 
root, constituted by subjective and intersubjective operations.” 13 This is what the 
publication of the  Krisis ,  Erfahrung und Urteil and  Ideen II , in Paci’s view, allowed 
us to make explicit. Ban ﬁ , who introduced Paci to Husserl, also had the  Logische 
Untersuchungen and  Ideen I as references, but he was able, according to Paci, to 
see the further development of Husserl’s thought still implicit in  Ideen I . In his 
 8  We should mention, as most eminent  ﬁ gures of this school, Piero Martinetti, Antonio Ban ﬁ , 
Mario Dal Pra, Ludovico Geymonat, Giovanni Emanuele Barié, Giulio Preti, Enzo Paci, Dino 
Formaggio (another important protagonist of Italian phenomenology, in particular for his attempt 
to apply phenomenological analysis to the art,) Mario Untersteiner, and Remo Cantoni. See F. 
Papi,  Vita e  ﬁ loso ﬁ a. La scuola di Milano. Ban ﬁ , Cantoni, Paci, Preti (Milan: Guerini 1990); A. 
Vigorelli,  La nostra inquietudine. Martinetti, Ban ﬁ , Rebora, Cantoni, Paci, De Martino, Rensi, 
Untersteiner, Dal Pra, Segre, Capitini (Milan: Mondadori, 2007); and D. Assael,  Alle origini della 
scuola di Milano. Martinetti, Barié, Ban ﬁ  (Milan: Guerini, 2009). 
 9  G. Brand,  Welt, Ich und Zeit: nach unveröffentlichten Manuskripten Edmund Husserls (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1955);  Mondo, io e tempo nei manoscritti inediti di Husserl , with an 
essay by Enzo Paci, trans. E. Filippini (Milan: Bompiani, 1960); and E. Husserl,  Die Krisis der 
europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie , Husserliana vol. VI, ed. 
by W. Biemel (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1954);  La crisi delle scienze europee e la fenomenologia tra-
scendentale , trans. E. Filippini, with an essay by Enzo Paci (Milan: Il Saggiatore, 1961). 
 10  V. Costa, “Sulla storia editoriale di  Idee I e sui criteri di questa edizione,” LIV. 
 11  E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico (Milan: Bompiani, 1961), 77. 
 12  E. Paci, “Attualità di Husserl,”  Idee per una enciclopedia fenomenologica (Milan: Bompiani, 
1973), 9. See also E. Paci, “I temi husserliani  ﬁ no al primo volume di  Idee . 1. Sulle  Ricerche 
logiche ; 2. Sul primo volume di  Idee ,” 159–215. 
 13  E. Paci, “Attualità di Husserl,” 9. 
164
R. Sacconaghi
essay  L’eredità di Ban ﬁ , after quoting where his teacher says that “phenomenology 
concerns every kind of object of a higher dimension,” such as “cultural objects, state, 
law, church, traditions,” and therefore is able to “reveal the levels of reality’s constitution,” 14 
Paci writes: “That Ban ﬁ says that reality itself should be phenomenologically 
considered is important,” 15 indeed it is a sort of “miracle,” 16 because “in Husserl it 
will become clear in  Ideen II [ published in 1952 ].” 17 He continues:
 What is at stake here is just what usually is refused to phenomenology: its substantial  praxis  
and historical nature … Husserl poses for us again … the problem of history, in a way according 
to which  praxis and re ﬂ ection are not divided and every particular action, although particular, 
has in itself the universal sense of the history and the meaning of truth, although the truth 
could never be something real … Ban ﬁ lived all these problems in a very radical way. 18  
 In order to understand Paci’s perspective we should also consider the Italian 
philosophical environment of the time, 19 but this would go beyond the scope of this 
chapter. Moreover, I shall not present Paci’s philosophy in each of its single aspects, 
either. In particular, I intend to focus on the most important consequence of Paci’s 
theoretical choices, i.e., a peculiar interpretation of the concept of  phenomenological 
reduction —which Husserl de ﬁ nes clearly for the  ﬁ rst time in  Ideen I . On the con-
trary, Paci argues that before the publication of  Ideen II and of the  Krisis “even the 
return to the subject was not understood in its fundamental sense.” 20 
 In this chapter I show how Paci gives an existential tone to the  epochē , interpreting 
it as the only act through which the subject starts considering himself and the other 
as such. His existential interpretation has different nuances, which I intend make 
explicit. First of all, I present the nature of “cognitive  praxis ” inherent to the  epochē , 
which is not only an epistemological method, nor a blind decision of the will. 
Second, I consider the af ﬁ nities that Paci  ﬁ nds between phenomenology and Marx’s 
thought, showing the  epochē as an overcoming of (scienti ﬁ c and social) alienation. 
In this sense, the  epochē is a negation of mundane data, a denial of the  abstraction 
in which we are alienated, aimed at establishing a society in which every subject is 
recognized as such. Third, I make explicit the  poetic character belonging to the 
 epochē  in Paci’s view. The  epochē achieves a poetic intuition of the universe’s 
cosmic structure, in which we discover ourselves as the transcendental center of 
everything precisely insofar as we are  human . Fourth, I consider the two fundamental 
dimensions of experience that the  epochē reveals to us, and by which is itself made 
possible: the  irreversibility of time and the original “economic”  need . I focus on 
 14  A. Ban ﬁ ,  Principi di una teoria della ragione (Milan: Isi, 1926), 567–68. 
 15  E. Paci, “L’eredità di Ban ﬁ ,”  Idee per una enciclopedia fenomenologica , 26. 
 16  Ibid. 
 17  Ibid. 
 18  Ibid. 
 19  About the Italian philosophical context of the time, see P. Rossi and C. A. Viano, eds.,  Filoso ﬁ a 
italiana e  ﬁ loso ﬁ e straniere nel dopoguerra (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1991); E. Garin et al., eds.,  La 
 ﬁ loso ﬁ a italiana dal dopoguerra ad oggi (Rome: Laterza, 1985). 
 20  E. Paci, “Attualità di Husserl,” 9. 
165
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
 Diario fenomenologico as the main source for this chapter because in both form and 
content it constitutes the place where his phenomenological perspective emerges in 
a very clear way. Paci’s peculiar conception of the  epochē shows the hidden impli-
cations of phenomenology and its underground af ﬁ nities with other philosophical 
perspectives. In this sense, the source of Paci’s greatness is at the same time his big-
gest shortcoming: an enormous capacity to “live again” what another philosopher 
has already lived, through a radical reinterpretation of that philosopher’s work. 
Phenomenology in Italy was born under and has developed thanks to Ban ﬁ and 
Paci, and through the perspectives established by them. Now phenomenology can at 
last be considered more directly, referring to Husserl’s original text. Every critique 
of Paci should at least take note of his great philosophical fecundity. 21 In fact, Costa, 
Franzini and Spinicci—who favored a different understanding of Husserl—are all 
former students of Giovanni Piana, 22 another decisive  ﬁ gure in the development of 
phenomenology in Italy, who was, in turn, a student of Enzo Paci. 23 Paci then, in a 
sense, taught phenomenology in precisely the same way that Husserl did, that is, 
regardless of their respective intentions,  de facto  their teaching encouraged their 
students’ corrections, revisions, and even dissent. 24 
 21  We must name, as Paci’s most outstanding students, Pier Aldo Rovatti, Salvatore Veca, 
Stefano Zecchi, Alfredo Marini, Amedeo Vigorelli, Andrea Bonomi, Giovanni Piana, Carlo 
Sini, Sandro Mancini. They were all protagonists in the diffusion and development of phenom-
enology—not only Husserl’s, but in general—in Italy. There are, of course, also several scholars 
from other universities who contributed (and some of them are still contributing) in ﬂ uentially 
to the study and the diffusion of Husserlian phenomenology in Italy. We already listed some 
of them among the authors involved by Enzo Paci in the 1960 volume  Omaggio a Husserl . 
Apart from them we should also mention Angela Ales Bello (University Lateranense, Rome); 
Mario Sancipriano (University of Siena); Mario Signore, Antonio Ponsetto and Giorgio Scrimieri 
(University of Lecce/Salento); Enrico Garulli and Vittorio De Palma (University of Urbino); 
Franco Bosio (University of Verona); Massimo Barale (University of Pisa); Renato Cristin 
(University of Trieste); Aldo Masullo (University of Naples); Bianca Maria D’Ippolito (University 
of Salerno); Virgilio Melchiorre and Michele Lenoci (Catholic University of Milan); Pasquale 
Pantaleo and Arcangelo Licinio (University of Bari); Stefano Besoli (University of Bologna); 
Francesco Saverio Trincia (University La Sapienza, Rome); Roberta Lanfredini (University of 
Florence); Nicoletta Ghigi (University of Perugia); Corrado Sinigaglia (University of Milan); Luca 
Vanzago (University of Pavia). 
 22  Among his important works, see in particular  I problemi della fenomenologia (Milan: Mondadori, 
1966); and  Elementi di una dottrina dell’esperienza. Saggio di  ﬁ loso ﬁ a fenomenologica (Milan: Il 
Saggiatore, 1967). 
 23  He wrote his thesis on Husserl’s later manuscripts under Paci’s supervision, published as G. 
Piana,  Esistenza e storia negli inediti di Husserl (Milan: Lampugnani Nigri, 1965). 
 24  Among others, Carmine Di Martino, professor at the State University of Milan and former stu-
dent of Carlo Sini, after a long study of Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Derrida, in the last years 
has devoted several courses to the interpretation of Husserlian phenomenology, trying to point out 
within it an original philosophy of experience. See for instance C. Di Martino,“Il senso comune 
nella fenomenologia,”  Valore e limiti del senso comune , ed. E. Agazzi (Milan: Franco Angeli, 
2004), 165–90; “Esperienza e intenzionalità nella fenomenologia di Husserl,”  Intenzionalità e pro-
getto. Tra  ﬁ loso ﬁ a e pedagogia , ed. F. Cappa (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2007), 17–46. 
166
R. Sacconaghi
 Paci’s Interpretation of the  Epochē 
 Paci assumes the concept of phenomenological reduction without denying either 
its possibility or its necessity. In his perspective the reduction still plays a central 
role: We  can  effect the reduction and we  need to do it in order to enter into the 
philosophical dimension. The phenomenological reduction in Paci’s philosophy 
can appear as an existential “dramatization” of its version originally worked out by 
Husserl. 
 First of all, Paci argues, “reducing to subjectivity is an act required by life.” 25 
Hence, according to him, there is an inexorable demand that belongs inherently to 
life itself. Why does our life have this demand? In Paci’s perspective, “life has to 
reconstitute itself because it has gone far away from its living principle. Life loses 
itself, wears off, dies.” 26 It is an existentialization of the naiveté of the Husserlian 
natural attitude: “We are actually lost … in what we believe is real life but, rather, 
is the life in which the living principle is “covered,” hidden, forgotten, … not present 
to himself. This sleepy oblivion of life itself is, for Husserl, the “mundane” life 
characterized by losing ourselves in our mundane world.” 27 He is speaking about 
consciousness’ orientation in the natural attitude, essentially naïve, described by 
Husserl in §§27–30 of  Ideen I. 28 The anonymity that characterizes subjective opera-
tions does not imply only an epistemological problem, parallel to the existential and 
social. It is the “living principle” itself that is forgotten. What is really under threat 
is nothing less than the possibility of living a human life. For this reason, the crisis 
of the European sciences is the crisis of our civilization. The way in which Paci 
conceives the  epochē as what allows us to discover the living principle presents 
strong connections with Heideggerian and Marxist perspectives (besides the evident 
Platonic references, 29 ) as we can notice in the following passage:
 Life must return to itself, to its own principle, because it is lost in the mundane. The return 
will be, then, a denial of “vanity” of the mundane and the most important act of phenome-
nology, therefore, will be the negation of the world in which we are lost. The world must be 
suspended, should not have our “yes,” our assent, should be placed in brackets, should be 
denied. Suspension, “bracketing,” denial of the mundane world: Here is the operation that 
is called  epochē . In order to live authentically, we must strive to deny the world. 30 
 25  E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico (Milan: Bompiani, 1961), 20. 
 26  E. Paci, “Husserl sempre di nuovo,”  Omaggio a Husserl , 10. 
 27  Ibid., 11. 
 28  E. Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Erstes 
Buch :  Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie , Husserliana, vol. III/1, ed. K. 
Schuhmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976);  Ideas pertaining to a pure Phenomenology and 
to a Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology , 
trans. Fr. Kersten (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1983), 51–57. 
 29  Plato was a fundamental source for Paci since the beginning of his studies. His  ﬁ rst work’s title 
(an adaptation of his thesis, written under the supervision of Ban ﬁ ) was  Il signi ﬁ cato del 
“Parmenide” nella  ﬁ loso ﬁ a di Platone , (Milan: Principato, 1938). 
 30  E. Paci, “Husserl sempre di nuovo,” 11. 
167
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
 For Paci the most important issue is the effort to  live authentically . The dimension 
of intellectual knowledge is not parallel, but rooted in this fundamental issue. Like 
Heidegger, Paci makes explicit this aspect of phenomenology, emphasizing the 
originality of the pre-categorial dimension of experience. However, the category of 
 praxis , 31 which plays in Paci’s view a decisive role in Husserlian thought, de ﬁ nes 
the original form of our relationship with the world more than the Heideggerian 
“care” ( Sorge ). This is, in Paci’s perspective, the meaning of the Husserlian concept 
of life-world. Since the knowledge presents a practical basis, its development in 
a philosophical sense toward self-awareness participates of the same nature: 
“The  epochē is not only a cognitive process. It is the insertion of oneself into a lived 
reality, in the temporal process.” 32 
 According to Paci, phenomenology is not a science that should assume experience 
as its own  object , “because phenomenology is life, is life itself.” 33 This idea does not 
imply that natural life is already a complete phenomenology, but that phenomenology 
is required and realized by life itself in order to “grasp” itself again, to achieve a new 
possession of itself, precisely because it is lost:
 When phenomenology adopted as its slogan “Back to things themselves,” by “things them-
selves” it meant simply life. Phenomenology, then, is life itself and is a  return to life … The 
return is necessary for life because it has lost, because it has moved away from itself, from 
what makes it as a life, from what is truly alive, the living principle, the  arché . 34 
 This idea that “getting lost” is the essential and original movement of life, and 
that phenomenology is the counter-movement of life attempting to return to itself, 
we can already  ﬁ nd in the thought of Martin Heidegger during his  ﬁ rst period in 
Freiburg, from 1919 to 1923. 35  Nevertheless, the way in which Paci conceives the 
nature of this mundane life tends to distinguish his perspective from Heidegger’s. 
Paci presents a “feeling” for this phenomenon that is closer to the Marxist tradition: 
Life that loses itself is like the  alienation described by Marx. In fact, the culmina-
tion of life’s dispersion is the scienti ﬁ c objectivism that leads to the  rei ﬁ cation of 
the subject, the supreme form of alienation: “The central point of the relationship 
between Marx and Husserl is in the concept of objectivity. … Objecti ﬁ cation 
 31  See E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico , 98: “In Husserl perception is never a merely cognitive fact 
in the narrow sense of the word. In each perception there is an interest … a minimum and a maxi-
mum of interest. Practical situation … Forseeable scholars’ misunderstanding of Husserl’s  praxis . 
Knowing itself is  praxis insofar as it is constituted … by operations which … tend to meaning, to 
truth.” 
 32  Ibid., 45–46. 
 33  E. Paci, “Husserl sempre di nuovo,” 10. 
 34  Ibid. 
 35  See M. Heidegger,  Zur Bestimmung der Philosophie , Gesaumtasgabe 56/57, ed. B. Heimbüchel 
(Frankfurt a.M.: Klostermann, 1987);  Toward the De ﬁ nition of Philosophy , ed. E.H. Sadler (London: 
Athlone Press, 2001); M. Heidegger, Ontologie. Hermeneutik der Faktizität , Gesamtausgabe 63, ed. 
K. Bröcker-Oltmanns (Frankfurt a.M.: Klostermann, 1988);  Ontology. The Hermeneutics of 
Facticity , trans. J. van Buren (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999). On this topic, see C. 
Esposito,  Heidegger. Storia e fenomenologia del possibile (Bari: Levante, 1992).  
168
R. Sacconaghi
is precisely alienation in its various meanings.” 36 The main form of this life’s 
dispersion, namely, the objecti ﬁ cation realized by the science dogmatically 
conceived, leads to the subject’s oblivion: As Husserl writes, “merely fact-minded 
sciences make merely fact-minded people.” 37  In the same sense, Paci argues that “the 
sciences are in crisis because they transform into objects those who are subjects 
or, in the language of Marx, because they transform social relationships between 
people into relationships between things … [ Husserl ] criticizes objecti ﬁ cation, 
which is to be understood as the Marx’s alienation.” 38  In Paci’s perspective the 
abstraction realized by capitalism has the same effect as that of the sciences that 
forget their roots in subjective operations: They both hide human  praxis as the 
origin of every possible meaning. 
 At the same time, Paci interprets the Marxist perspective in the light of 
phenomenology. He poses the problem of knowledge—no longer conceived as 
parallel to the dimension of  praxis , but deeply intertwined with it—at the heart of 
every political issue, as its root. For this reason he argues that the origin of the alien-
ation is the misuse of science:
  When Marx criticizes the concept of capitalist economics, he criticizes the  misuse of science 
and a science that does not recognize to be determined by the historical situation and reality. 
From this point of view, a science so conceived, is abstract … Capitalism, through the misuse 
of science,  transforms the concrete into the abstract , and then considers concrete the 
abstraction, while hiding with its ideology this transformation. 39 
 The fundamental problem has a “cognitive” (to be interpreted in a wider sense) 
nature because it is in the cognitive acts that the “play” between the recognition of 
the subject as such and its opposite reduction to object takes place. This recognition 
is the fundamental basis for every kind of  praxis , scienti ﬁ c as well as political: “The 
 telos or meaning of truth, both for the natural sciences and for the human sciences, 
is the establishment of a society of people where no man is or made object.” 40 Hence, 
phenomenology and Marxism have the same task: To  ﬁ ght against  naturalization of 
man, overcoming the oblivion of original  praxis , and trying to achieve a society in 
which a man is a subject and not an object. 
 36  E. Paci, “Marxismo e fenomenologia,”  aut aut 133 (1973): 8. 
 37  E. Husserl,  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenlogie. 
Eine Einletung in die phanomenologische Philosophie , Husserliana vol. VI, ed. W. Biemel (The 
Hague: Nijhoff, 1954);  The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. 
An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy , trans. D. Carr (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1970), 16. 
 38  E. Paci, “Il signi ﬁ cato dell’uomo in Marx e Husserl,”  aut aut 73 (1963): 19. 
 39  Ibid., 11. 
 40  E. Paci, “L’enciclopedia fenomenologica e il  telos dell’umanità,”  Idee per una enciclopedia 
fenomenologica , 43. See also E. Paci, “Il signi ﬁ cato dell’uomo in Marx e Husserl,”  aut aut 73 
(1963): 19, “Phenomenology is transcendental … by laying concrete subjects as sciences’ base. 
Husserl thinks that a true society is a society in which no man is an object, or a thing, but in which 
all are subjects. To him the idea of this society is the  telos of history and only this society gives a 
meaning to life of all men and is the very truth of the real historical movement.” 
169
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
 Paci does not mean to reduce phenomenology to Marxism: By showing af ﬁ nities 
between objectivism and alienation, he wants to make explicit the political implica-
tions of the phenomenological perspective, and in particular the political power 
hidden in the concept of  epochē— where “political dimension” has to be understood 
as the problem of intersubjective relationships. The political change depends on the 
phenomenological attitude and, at the same time, this attitude is not a merely intel-
lectual act, but one’s position before the other. 
 In this sense, Paci writes that “subjectivity, … which through the  epochē overcomes 
oblivion and alienation—namely the “getting lost” in the mundane—transcendental 
consciousness as a radical return to the  cogito , here becomes a historical awareness and 
has a historical role.” 41  The real “factor of change” is the subject, which can have an 
impact on society through the  epochē , becoming therefore historically decisive. On the 
one hand everything begins with the subject’s decision, but on the other hand every 
personal decision is always deeply in ﬂ uenced by relationships with others. 
 We can  ﬁ nd exempli ﬁ cations of this idea in many passages of Paci’s  Diario 
fenomenologico , which contains his philosophical re ﬂ ections written between 1956 
and 1961. First, it should be noted how he emphasizes the  epochē ’s character of 
 negation of mundane data, abstract and therefore limiting. In this way he puts his 
phenomenology in the dialectical and Marxist tradition. As he writes in other essays, 
“the  epochē is the refusal of the conclusiveness of data”, 42  i.e., “the taken of aware-
ness of the negativity of a fact in order to understand it, reveal it, transform it.” 43 
However, in his  Diario fenomenologico one could notice a different nuance as well, 
a different tone in this denial, a tone that might be de ﬁ ned as  poetic :
 January 8, 1958. The pavement on which I walk … the impenetrability of things. To the 
philosopher, to the man who lives in the philosopher, all this may become enigmatic … 
Everything: His city, his home, the table at which he is working. And all the events in which 
he lives, and the people. They are there. But in some sense I deny the events, the people and 
the things. This negation is fundamental … I do not accept this impenetrability, the opacity 
of things. By saying ‘no’ … I exercise the  epochē . 44 
 I have to negate the mundane data in order to grasp their meaning, because only 
if I suspend the obviousness of experience, i.e., the way in which everything is 
already given to me (by tradition, perception, etc.), I could know something in my 
own life, in my personal and unique experience. The  epochē is a “no” said to reality 
as naturalistically reduced, dogmatically understood, and therefore deprived of its 
meaning. In other words, it is the refusal of the lack of meaning or, more precisely, 
of its  expression : Through the  epochē I say “no” to the way in which I would live 
spontaneously, naturally—a way that for essential reasons prevents me from feeling 
and knowing the meaning present in my experience.
 41  E. Paci, “Sul signi ﬁ cato dello spirito in Husserl,”  aut aut 54 (1959): 348. 
 42  E. Paci, “Vita e ragione in Antonio Ban ﬁ ,”  aut aut 43–44 (1958): 59. 
 43  E. Paci, “Fondazione fenomenologica dell’antropologia ed enciclopedia delle scienze,”  aut aut 
96–97 (1966): 29. 
 44  E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico 41–42. 
170
R. Sacconaghi
 The world is there and until now I thought … that its being was obvious. Now I know that 
its being is obscure, enigmatic, problematic. My “no” is the “no” to a world without a meaning 
for me, even if it has had a meaning for others, even if its soil carries the traces of others’ 
footsteps and is loaded with the sediments of the countless meanings it has had for the others. 
But these meanings are crystallized, are sleeping … In order to awaken them I must say 
“no” to everything, which is sleeping, which is obscure, hidden. 45 
 How to achieve this denial, aimed at the liberation of the expression of meaning? 
By letting everything in my personal experience resonate, without predetermining the 
limits of this experience, and thematizing the way in which the world offers itself to 
me. This is the return to the  cogito and the obedience to the Husserlian “principle of 
all principles,” 46 in Paci’s interpretation. So, for instance, the whole history of a city 
can become  present in my personal experience. 47 We can notice the poetic tone inter-
twined with the philosophical interest in many passages of Paci’s phenomenological 
descriptions. 48 These pages are not the result of improvised pseudo-literary exercises 
to which Paci devoted himself overnight. On the contrary, in his theoretical perspec-
tive, they have a decisive philosophical function. This form of description, in fact, 
should be the beginning of a philosophical research. In other words, this diary does 
not want to be the  ﬁ nal aim of phenomenology, but its essential (and never completed) 
introduction. In this diary, according to Paci, we can face the new dimension to which 
we are led by the  epochē , which opens the level of our original and concrete experi-
ence: “The  epochē … makes us live in the concreteness of experience.” 49 In fact, the 
 epochē leads us to a radical questioning about the truth of our personal lives, and in 
this sense Paci writes also that “phenomenological attitude … is Socratic” 50 :
 What do we really do and live every day? This question allows us to understand how, in a 
particular sense, phenomenology makes a  diary possible, a new form of diary, where 
abstract words tend to disappear in order to make room for what they are indicating … This 
diary is not yet a phenomenology, but can be the introduction to it. 51 
 This idea is based on the belief that “truth is not a static thing, but a lived mean-
ing, to be always recuperated in the exercise of the  epochē .” 52 From this point of 
view, the diary is a privileged form of such an inquiry: “Most of all, in the  Diary 
emerges the sense of time, the incarnation of philosophical truth in everyday life … 
 45  Ibid., 42. 
 46  E. Husserl,  Ideen I , §24, 44. 
 47  See E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico 77–78: “September 18, 1958. Venice: The past that becomes, 
in Husserl’s sense, presenti ﬁ cation and that, at the same time, keeps alive the lived horizon. 
Continuous comparisons between today and yesterday, presence of all that happened here, known 
and unknown. Venice seems to bring back any gaze which was ever cast on her and to communicate 
to us secret messages of unknown lives that reach us as if they had remained in some way inside the 
stones of the great palaces, in the labyrinth of the ‘ calli ’, on the doorsteps worn out by the waves.” 
 48  See ibid., 11, 25, 41. 
 49  Ibid., 50. 
 50  Ibid., 48. 
 51  Ibid., 6. 
 52  Ibid. 
171
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
for me the subject is a mode of relations and an experience lived in the  ﬁ rst person. 
Again: We can start only from what we ourselves experience.” 53 The form of the 
inquiry, then, is suggested by the structure of the experience itself. 
 But here one could refuse this perspective, denying the legitimacy of this effort 
to extend personal experience to philosophy, and even to that kind of philosophy 
(phenomenology) that wants to constitute itself as rigorous and fundamental science, 
as  ﬁ rst philosophy. So the problem that imposes itself is: What kind of  universality 
might be present in a diaristic, personal and poetic expression of one’s experience? 
Without universality, in fact, a description has no scienti ﬁ c value, and could not 
ultimately be shared nor communicated. Paci claims that phenomenology reveals to 
us a new form of universality, which presents a  cosmic form. In the  ﬁ rst page of his 
 Diario fenomenologico he explains this perspective: “In every fact, in every isolated 
thing, there appear connections with all the things, with all other facts … And each 
fact is individuated, even if it has the form of all the other facts of its genre … No 
fact is purely individual, no fact is purely universal.” 54 Since poetic intuition can 
grasp this cosmic horizon in every particular thing, poetry could become the 
basis for a philosophical and scienti ﬁ c inquiry. One could notice a Goethian 
in ﬂ uence in this perspective, as Paci himself shows in an essay dedicated to the 
German thinker:
 Goethe observes: “Nobody wanted to admit that science and poetry could go together. 
They were forgetting that science was generated from poetry, and they were not considering 
that, in a different time, poetry and science could amiably meet each other again at an upper 
level, with a mutual bene ﬁ t.” In order to accept Goethe’s position it should be enough think 
at Lucretius’  De rerum natura and Boscovich’s poem on Newton’s physics. 55 
 Moreover, the awareness of this cosmic perspective is not only at the beginning 
of phenomenology in a  chronological sense, but also in a  transcendental sense, as 
its radical condition of possibility. In this sense, after a long description of how his 
teacher Antonio Ban ﬁ  taught him the phenomenological method 56 starting with 
asking him to describe the vase that he had before him, Paci writes:
 The description of the vase contains in itself the meaning of my world, of my life, of every-
body’s life. It has it in itself as a truth that is to be lived, increasingly achieved … according 
to an in ﬁ nite  telos . In ﬁ nite, but potentially present in each of my experiences, if I try to 
examine it, to turn it into a  phenomenon . 57 
 53  Ibid., 7–8. 
 54  Ibid., 11. 
 55  E. Paci, “Frammenti da una lettura fenomenologica di Goethe,”  aut aut 277–278 (1997), 4–18. 
Also Whitehead, another fundamental reference for Paci (who dedicates him several essays and 
introduces his work in Italy, making his scholars study him and translate in Italian his works), 
presents a similar position on this issue. See A.N. Whitehead,  The interpretation of science. 
Selected Essays (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1961), 167:“It is essential to keep in mind that sci-
ence and poetry have the same root in human nature. Forgetfulness of this fact will ruin … our 
educational system.” 
 56  See E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico , 84–88. 
 57  Ibid., 88. 
172
R. Sacconaghi
 In this passage we can see that for Paci the grasp of the in ﬁ nite’s presence in our 
experience is the reason why phenomenological description does not remain a 
positivistic psychological analysis: In describing every single aspect of my con-
sciousness’ life, in fact, I can discover a connection with everything. 
 Now, this cosmic structure can be revealed through our personal experience and 
 only through it, because “the individual is unique, but it is all.” 58 Therefore, Paci 
argues, “philosophy starts when this individual discovers he has within himself 
essential relationships with everything else.” 59 It is a sort of Pascalian revival of 
Kant’s Copernican revolution in an existential key: “I am the  ﬁ rst fact … Not the 
subject of idealism, not the absolute, but the concrete encounter of  ﬁ nite and in ﬁ nite, of 
light and shadow. I, as a man, as that man who has within himself the world, even the 
world that he ignores.” 60  It is Husserl, according to Paci, that raises up to a philosophical 
level this perspective 61 : The German philosopher shows us that in every  ego takes 
place an “involvement between  ﬁ nite and in ﬁ nite, between the whole and the part”. 62 
For this reason, continues Paci, “Husserl speaks about a ‘cosmic’ correlation in 
which there are always subject and object, the ‘I’ and the world.” 63 
 Paci interprets those sections in  Ideen I on the absoluteness of consciousness in 
these terms. 64 He describes  intentionality , our consciousness’ essential structure, as a 
relation that is at the same time  immanent  and  transcendent . Paci indicates the condi-
tion of possibility of this paradox in the Husserlian model of  temporality : “The rela-
tion must be transcendent without creating an abyss between  ego and  cogitata … In 
other words, the relation must be both immanent and transcendent. It is very important 
that the last Husserl clearly understands that such immanence-transcendence is pos-
sible only as temporality.” 65  It is the way in which Husserl conceives the  internal 
temporal self-awareness  that allows us to grasp this original relation within our expe-
rience: “Husserl does not conceive time as con ﬁ ned in the atomic instant, and therefore 
characterizes the instant as something wider, as enlarged time, relational and not 
atomic. The  Gegenwärtigung is this  enlarged presence .” 66  In the so-called living-pres-
ent we have then a  ﬁ nite point in which the past and the future condense themselves:
 The  Gegenwärtigung is yet a part of time, but in this part there are, in the modalities of 
retention and protention, both the past and the future, as well as, in the  monad all the universe 
is present. From this point of view, the  Gegenwärtigung is a  ﬁ nite part of the time in which 
the whole as in ﬁ nite is present. 67 
 58  Ibid., 11. 
 59  Ibid. 
 60  Ibid. 
 61  Ibid., 12: “But this is Husserl, and it is the opposite of absolutization of the ‘I’, because it is the 
relational mediation, the self-recognition of the truth which man has within himself and which 
must be realized in history, in time, in the world. Individuation as the meaning of truth.” 
 62  E. Paci, “Sulla presenza come centro relazionale in Husserl,”  aut aut 58 (1960): 240. 
 63  Ibid. 
 64  See E. Husserl,  Ideen I , §55, 128–129. 
 65  E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico , 69. 
 66  E. Paci, “Sulla presenza come centro relazionale in Husserl,”  aut aut 58 (1960): 237. 
 67  Ibid., 237–238. 
173
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
 Paci argues that Husserl’s analysis leads us therefore to identify the real 
 transcendental in  man  as that point in which the encounter between  ﬁ nite and in ﬁ nite, 
the whole and the part, nature and spirit, takes place. 68 He recognizes “Husserl’s 
‘thing itself’ in  concrete human life , as daily work, in touch with nature.” 69  
 In particular, there are two fundamental dimensions of the structure of our expe-
rience, in which the two modalities of time-consciousness, retention and protention, 
re ﬂ ect themselves. The  ﬁ rst one is the  irreversibility of our time, because of which 
we cannot negate what has already happened: “What has happened is here, insup-
pressible, present in us. What has happened is the unavoidable side of what has 
already been lived.” 70 First of all, this is a structure that we cannot elude, an essential 
law of our lives: “The essential and necessary modality of time is irreversibility.” 71 
Second, every attempt to overcome this modality, trying to return to the “naturalistic 
origin” is the opposite of the search for the “original,” which is the transcendental: 
“The original, the authentic, is not the return to the starting point,  it is not going 
back (the irreversibility of life prevents it), but rediscovering the nature, new, after 
the  epochē .” 72 This idea might appear contradictory within Paci’s thought, since the 
 epochē is  ﬁ rst of all a form of negation of what is ready-made. Yet, this concept is 
an integration of what we have stated about the negative nature of the  epochē . In 
fact, Paci writes that “time has an irreversible direction, but this direction can be 
transformed by man into sense, meaning of history, of reality.” 73 In other words, far 
from implying a realistic and dogmatic perspective, the concept of irreversibility 
allows precisely for a teleological perspective, because from irreversibility can arise 
the fundamental experience of  lack , that is, in turn, the source of every form of  need : 
“Since it is not possible to go back, the pain for the loss of the mother appears as 
need, as  eros , as direction toward truth, as intentionality … Organic and psychic 
tension toward truth, daily work needed to realize it.” 74 The category of  need is the 
second category that de ﬁ nes the structure of our experience: “Irreversibility is one 
of the fundamental structures of the life-world, just like economic need.” 75 Paci 
interprets this category in an economic sense because, on the basis of our essentially 
corporeal constitution, “the need that can be satis ﬁ ed with economic goods is more 
original than any other needs.” 76 As we said, it is irreversibility that makes economic 
needs possible: “the essential and necessary modality of time is irreversibility, on 
 68  See E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico , 64. 
 69  Ibid., 39. 
 70  Ibid., 76. 
 71  Ibid., 108. 
 72  Ibid., 45. 
 73  Ibid., 109. 
 74  Ibid., 22. 
 75  Ibid., 21. 
 76  E. Paci, “Due temi fenomenologici. I. Fenomenologia e dialettica; II. La fenomenologia e la 
fondazione dell’economia politica,”  aut aut 116 (1970): 24. On this issue, see also E. Paci, “Per 
una fenomenologia del bisogno,”  aut aut 123–124 (1971): 117–26. 
174
R. Sacconaghi
which … ‘economic structure’ constitutes itself.” 77 This is the dimension of man’s 
life that allows him to address the future, transforming time in history. In other 
words, it is the way in which life itself demands the  epochē . A dialectical relation-
ship between  irreversibility and  need leads us to the  epochē , which in turn reveals 
them to us. There is a passage in which Paci describes in a synthetic and suggestive 
way the new perspective on the world that arises from the  epochē : “ Everything is 
connected to a cosmic perspective . The universe emerges in me as a need, as a 
project, as a way in which it can proceed and in which … it engages the whole of 
itself.” 78 With the negation of mundane data the world appears no longer as “already 
made,” and therefore is also “no longer incomprehensible.” 79 It starts to express 
itself through me, i.e., through my experience of it: “We feel it in our body and in 
the mutual feeling of our bodies. It is a world … that  expresses itself from within. 
And it is the more internal the more it expresses itself, the more it is alive in exteri-
ority.” 80 After the  epochē , then, one perceives the things as if they were “just born 
now” and therefore he has to let “them introduce themselves,” because he is not 
their “owner.” 81 For this reason Paci speaks about this experience as “a good that one 
can live only if he accepts it as a gift.” 82 These two words,  birth and  gift , characterize 
our experience as essentially temporal and therefore irreversible. 
 But experience is not only a “show” to contemplate and a gift to receive. The 
universe, in Paci’s perspective, “thinks itself in us, and in us it struggles to become 
clear, to come to light:” 83 In this sense he writes that it emerges in me  as a need , 
opening me toward the future, toward new possibilities. Toward the world that is 
rising in us we are  responsible : “Man, who perceives himself as being invested by 
the meaning of the cosmos, who feels his responsibility toward the sense of this 
universal process, perceives the dignity of all perspectives and all forms, of miner-
als, of vegetables, of animals, of things and of persons.” 84 In this sense we can 
understand better why Paci insists on claiming that phenomenology is a  praxis :
 The tree [ after the epochē ] is not any longer in the air, it is “crystallized,” and with it every-
thing else. It is waiting, and exists in this waiting. It has no longer an obvious, ordinary 
meaning. I must give it its meaning. The world is awaiting its sense, its meaning, its aim 
from me, the subject. I am the instrument through which the world can become true, can 
transform itself into truth. I have to see it as it appears to me, I have to describe it, make it 
become revelation, phenomenon. 85 
 77  E. Paci,  Diario fenomenologico , 108. 
 78  Ibid., 15. 
 79  Ibid., 36. 
 80  Ibid. 
 81  Ibid., 25. 
 82  Ibid., 88: “This gift is the always renewed and always renewable meaning of my life, of the oth-
ers’ life and of the world’s life.” 
 83  Ibid., 58. 
 84  Ibid., 15. 
 85  Ibid., 42–43. 
175
10  Ideen I in Italy and Enzo Paci
 Paci argues that this transformation of the world must be achieved in the light of 
the  ideas , which are not something  real . They can act in the history and change it as 
the  telos toward which man is attracted. The emergence of these ideas is made 
possible by the phenomenological negation of mundane data: “The truth overwhelms 
me; it appears to me as an in ﬁ nite idea that I keep trying to get closer. I have made a 
revolution … The world that was already there … is no longer a world already made, 
but to be made. It has become a task, a goal that gives meaning to life.” 86  This is the 
 transcendental  nature of Paci’s phenomenology, which shall not become an  ontol-
ogy , like Heidegger’s, but a  praxis , because truth is something to achieve: “What 
phenomenology strives for, then, is not the inquiry on being, a being which would be 
behind things. Its aim is the truth which is not behind us but in front of us.” 87 The 
fundamental political issue emerges as the main goal of the transcendental research:
 In ﬁ nite truth lives in the  ﬁ nite, but the  ﬁ nite can never claim to exhaust it in itself … and to 
have realized it … The truth we are trying to reach is not a  being , a metaphysical-theological 
being, but a  meaning , which is conceived in a transcendental teleological horizon as  telos 
of an intersubjective rational life—i.e., of a life in which each subject is subject for the 
other, not object. 88 
 In Paci’s view, phenomenology is  ﬁ rst of all an education for the subject aimed 
at transforming society: “Phenomenology is not a form of contemplation, but an 
 ascesis , in its etymological sense of  exercise . It is a transformation of society.” 89 The 
start of this exercise adopts the form of a “diary [ that ] is a personal way of living the 
crisis, of  ﬁ nding the directions of the dialectic;” it is a “lived re ﬂ ection, with its own 
limits, which seeks however an encounter and wants to realize concretely a path.” 90 
 Considering this last quote, we can conclude by emphasizing how in Paci’s per-
spective his diary takes the place of the Husserlian  ﬁ rst philosophy , whose  ﬁ eld 
should be the transcendental dimension opened up by the  epochē . This dimension, 
as transcendental, is essentially autonomous,  pre-empirical and therefore also  pre-
human , as Husserl explains in §§ 27–32 and 47–55 of  Ideen I . On the contrary, for 
Paci the dimension to which we are led by the  epochē is precisely human life. This 
is the reason why the personal and poetic descriptions of this diary can present 
themselves as already phenomenological, playing the role of the fundamental intro-
duction to the research. In this consists Paci’s “existentialization” of phenomenology 
which allows, in turn, the “dramatization” of the  epochē , conceived as (1) a negation 
of mundane data, (2) a poetic intuition of the cosmic nature of experience—as 
something that has an  irreversible direction but at the same time is not “already 
made”—(3) the assumption of responsibility toward it and (4) a political action 
based on the fundamental economic needs. The poetic intuition of the cosmic form 
 86  Ibid., 43. 
 87  Ibid. 
 88  Ibid., 106–107. 
 89  Ibid., 9. 
 90  Ibid. 
176
R. Sacconaghi
of experience develops into a political  praxis and into a dialogue with the arts 91 
and the sciences. In fact, Paci had the project of a new encyclopedia of sciences 
elaborated in a phenomenological perspective. 92 Moreover, one of his greatest works 
was the foundation and the editorship (until his death, in 1976) of the philosophical 
magazine  aut aut , 93 in which several engagements with scientists and artists have 
taken place. 
 We might summarize Paci’s phenomenological perspective by considering the 
double meaning of the word “ conception ,” which indicates at the same time the 
cognitive act of ideation ( poetic  dimension) and the physical act of conceiving a 
new life ( political dimension). This is in Paci’s view the double power of the  epochē , 
which starts a political revolution by introducing us to a new form of knowledge. 
 Acknowledgements   I would like to thank Michele Averchi, Francesco Poggiani, Santiago 
Ramos, Andrea Staiti, and Federico Zangrandi for their helpful comments on an earlier version of 
this chapter. 
 91  A very interesting example of the dialogue with the arts is the one that took place between Paci 
and Giuseppe Ungaretti. See G. Ungaretti,  Lettere a un fenomenologo , with an essay by Enzo Paci 
(Milan: Scheiwiller, 1972.) 
 92  See E. Paci,  Idee per una enciclopedia fenomenologica ; S. Zecchi, “L’idea di enciclopedia 
fenomenologica di E. Paci,”  La fenomenologia dopo Husserl nella cultura contemporanea 
(Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1978), 72–79. 
 93  On the history of this magazine, see A. Vigorelli “Una rivista milanese di  ﬁ loso ﬁ a e cultura:  aut 
aut di Enzo Paci (1951–1972),”  Rivista di  ﬁ loso ﬁ a 3 (1995): 645–55; L. Boella, “La responsabilità 
di pensare:  aut aut e il rapporto della  ﬁ loso ﬁ a con la realtà,”  La cultura  ﬁ loso ﬁ ca italiana attraverso 
le riviste 1945–2000 , ed. P. Di Giovanni (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2006), 277–81. 
177
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_11, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The Impact of the “ Ideen ” on Heidegger 
 The lecture courses Martin Heidegger gave in Freiburg and Marburg between 
1919 and the publication of  Sein und Zeit 1 in 1927 provide a solid basis for under-
standing the in ﬂ uence of Husserl’s  Ideen I 2 and  Ideen II 3 on him and de ﬁ nitive 
con ﬁ rmation that  Ideen II  is one of the main texts that he had in mind in the famous 
footnote where he thanks Husserl for “intensive personal guidance and the most 
generous access to unpublished investigations that had acquainted him with the 
most diverse areas of phenomenological research” (SZ 38). Heidegger’s own account 
in the early lectures conveys the image of two fellow researchers each pursuing 
phenomenology as—to use Heidegger’s words—the “original science of life in itself” 
 T. J.  Nenon (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  University of Memphis ,  Memphis ,  TN ,  USA 
e-mail:  tnenon@memphis.edu 
 Chapter 11 
 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics 
 Thomas  J.  Nenon  
 1  Martin Heidegger,  Sein und Zeit (Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, 1972), abbreviated in the 
following as SZ. All citations will be listed according to the page numbers in the Niemeyer edition, 
which are also listed in the margins of both of the published English translations. 
 2  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch ,  Husserliana, Band III (den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976). References to Husserl’s 
works will be cited using the volume number from the  Husserliana series in roman numerals followed 
by the page number in Arabic numbers. These page numbers are normally listed in the margins of 
translations into other languages, including English. 
 3  Edmund Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Zweites Buch ,  Husserliana, Band IV (den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952). 
178
T.J. Nenon
(“ Ursprungs wissenschaft vom Leben an sich ”) (GA 58, 1) 4 or simply of “ Geist ” 
(GA 58, 19), not only in parallel, but also in collaboration. Part of the reason for 
Heidegger’s close identi ﬁ cation with Husserl was not only the fundamental insights 
he had gained ever since reading the  Logische Untersuchungen beginning with his 
university studies in 1909, 5  but also the trajectory that Husserl’s work had taken 
after his encounter with Dilthey as articulated, for example, in the Third Part of 
 Ideen II and in his lectures on “ Natur und Geist .” 6  
 Heidegger was certainly also well familiar with  Ideen I, 7 but, even after the 
appearance of  Ideen I , it is the  Logische Untersuchungen that he considers the 
ground-breaking work that remains the basis for own phenomenological investiga-
tions (see, for example, GA 63, 70; GA 17, 49–50). He provides a positive account 
of both phenomenological reduction and the noesis/noema distinction that are 
important new additions introduced in  Ideen I  as crucial elements of phenomenology, 
yet he also  ﬁ nds much there that is problematic and indicates that Husserl has not 
distanced himself as much from unquestioned assumptions of modern philosophy, 
especially Descartes, as Heidegger considers necessary if phenomenology is to realize 
its fullest potential. The two main lecture courses in which  Ideen I are discussed 
explicitly and in some detail are the 1923–1924 course entitled  Einführung in die 
phänomenologische Forschung (GA 17) and the 1925 course  Prolegomena zur 
Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs (GA 20). 
 In the 1923–1924 course, Heidegger introduces the object of phenomenological 
research by means of “Husserl’s up until now furthest developed position, the ‘Ideas 
concerning a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Research’” (GA 17, 47). 
He cites Husserl’s description of phenomenology “as the  descriptive eidetic science of 
pure consciousness”  (ibid., 139), but criticizes Husserl’s assumption that philosophy 
must be a science (ibid., 79–82) and its overemphasis on theoretical knowledge as the 
model for experience as a whole (ibid., 82–83). Between the earliest Freiburg lectures 
and this course in Marburg, Heidegger had come to see a difference between the basic 
direction of Husserl’s work and his own. He does not see Husserl’s orientation on 
veri ﬁ able truths as helpful for the kinds of questions now in the foreground for him. 
“One should note above all that truth, in as far as it is interpreted as validity, hides the 
 4  Martin Heidegger, Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie  (Wintersemester 1919/20), ed. H.-H. 
Gander,  Gesamtausgabe, Band 58 (Frankfurt/Main: Klostermann Verlag,1992). References to 
Heidegger’s works other than  Sein und Zeit will be cited according to the  Gesamtausgabe , listing 
the volume number, followed by the page number. The English translations of the lecture courses 
list these page numbers in the headers of the translation text. 
 5  As reported in his own account of his life from the Foreword to his  Frühe Schriften from 1972 
(GA 1, 56). 
 6  Edmund Husserl,  Natur und Geist. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1919 ,  Husserliana. Materialien . 
Band IV (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2002). 
 7  The 1914 work contains what is probably his earliest reference to Husserl’s  Ideen I in a footnote 
to the section on “The Negative Judgment” (GA 1, 181). Other references to the  Ideas I there 
include a distinction between simpler forms of knowledge and knowledge that takes the form of a 
judgment, (GA 1, 268) positive appropriations of his conception of the “noematic,” (GA 1, 282 and 
310) and a footnote that cites “the valuable statements by E. Husserl regard ‘pure consciousness’ 
… that provide a decisive insight into the richness of ‘consciousness’ ….” (GA 1, 405)—all of 
which show that he worked through  Ideen I soon after it appeared. 
179
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
decisive problems of  Dasein . The question is whether for historical knowledge in 
general the interpretation of truth as validity makes any sense. Even more question-
able is it with regard to philosophical knowledge, most impossible is it in the case of 
the ‘truth’ of art and religion” (ibid., 98). He emphasizes that “… what Husserl says 
about evidence is vastly superior to everything else that has ever been said about it 
and that he placed the issue on secure footing for the  ﬁ rst time” (GA 17, 272–73), and 
he acknowledges—without reference to the speci ﬁ c passages in  Ideen I to this 
effect 8 —“… that Husserl sees that each domain of objects has a speci ﬁ c evidence 
corresponding to its content …” (ibid., p. 273), but adds, “… by contrast, the  authentic 
question of evidence in the most fundamental sense only begins with the question 
about the  speci ﬁ c evidence of the access to Being and the disclosure of a being, of 
retaining and holding on to a being that has become accessible. Only within the 
phenomenon grasped in this way does theoretical evidence have its place” (ibid.). 
Heidegger says that  Ideen I  fails to move far enough beyond the tendencies within 
modern philosophy to categorize and scienti ﬁ cally determine everything including 
consciousness itself. He sees the project of determining life as the whole of experi-
ences that are seen as individual facts instead of “understanding  life itself in its 
authentic Being and responding to the  question concerning the character of its Being ” 
(ibid., 274–75) as deeply problematic. 
 The fundamental character of life in its authentic Being is what he calls “temporality,” 
which now means above all a confrontation with one’s  ﬁ nitude and the fact that life is a 
performance ( Vollzug ) that must be understood as “call.” Life is not a fact but something 
that must be accomplished. This reliance on facts is what Heidegger means by “validity” 
in the passage cited above. The critique of truth as validity implies that Heidegger now 
sees Husserl’s project as hindered by his presumption the kinds of questions at stake in 
the truth of art and religion can be answered by intuitions that will provide the same kind 
of certainty and universal validity that is possible for theoretical questions. 
 Heidegger’s position will eventually culminate in the famous dictum from  Sein und 
Zeit that the most fundamental questions must be faced with the awareness that no 
one and nothing can provide Dasein with the answer to the question of the ultimate 
source of meaning for one’s life and that facing up to the essential indeterminacy 
of the proper response is essential for authentic Dasein. Hence the remarks at the end 
of the course where he describes the task of phenomenology as “explicating Dasein in 
its Being” (ibid., 278) and as “the exhibition ( Aufweis ) of Dasein itself” (ibid., 279). 
What Heidegger calls the “historical” here is not a set of facts, but a point of decision. 
His critique of Husserl, above all of the predominant tendencies still present in his 
work but as expressed already in  Ideen I , is that his orientation on reason modeled 
upon the search for knowledge is ill equipped to handle these sorts of questions. 9  
 8  Namely §§138–39 (Hua III, 321–24). 
 9  If one wants to try to identify a “turning point” in this gradual development, a good candidate 
would be the lectures on  Phänomenologie des religiösen Lebens (GA 60) in which the guiding 
model is the early Christian issue of the “conversion” to a whole different dimension of temporal-
ity—the time of eternal life versus the time of mundane existence—as articulated in the Pauline 
epistles. See on this issue Ted Kiesel,  The Genesis of Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1993), 176–227. 
180
T.J. Nenon
 Heidegger’s critique of these limitations is described not so much as a difference 
between Husserl and himself, but as a tension within Husserl’s own phenomenological 
project. The countervailing tendencies that he sees as positive are articulated in the 
manuscripts and lectures from Husserl during precisely this period. In a footnote to 
the essay “ Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs ” from 1924, Heidegger acknowledges the 
debt he owes to the method of phenomenology  ﬁ rst laid out in the  Logische 
Untersuchungen , but continues with the observation that phenomenology is much 
more than a “technique” (GA 64, 18). Rather it requires that “the way of investigating 
( Untersuchungsart ) must be prescribed ( vorgegeben ) by the in each case speci ﬁ c 
things themselves. The author [i.e., Heidegger] owes his understanding of this fact 
less to that book than to intense personal guidance by Husserl himself, who familiarized 
him with the different content domains ( Sachgebiete ) of phenomenological research 
through repeated instruction and the most generous access to unpublished manu-
scripts” (ibid.). One can well assume that one of the primary manuscripts Heidegger 
has in mind here must be  Ideen II , but explicit con ﬁ rmation of this can only be 
found in the lecture course  Prolegomena zur Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs (GA 20) 
from 1925. There, Heidegger cites Scheler and Husserl as building upon insights 
from Dilthey that move the analysis of pure consciousness from a naturalistic to a 
personalistic perspective and recognize that, “the person  ﬁ nds herself in a speci ﬁ c 
self-sameness over against the world, which actively in ﬂ uences and which reacts 
back upon her; that in each moment the person as a whole reacts, not just in willing, 
feeling, and viewing, but simultaneously all of those in one; and that the connected 
life ( Lebenszusammenhang ) of the person in each situation is one that is in develop-
ment” (GA 20, 164). 
 Heidegger further locates Husserl within the arc laid out by Dilthey and Scheler 
when he calls Husserl’s investigations into the structures of personhood a “personalistic 
psychology” (ibid., 167). He reports that Husserl’s  ﬁ rst attempt to work out such a 
personalistic psychology began with intense work in 1914/1915 that leads to the 
courses on “Natur und Geist” mentioned here (and that Heidegger had recom-
mended earlier to his students in 1919 10 ). More importantly, Heidegger con ﬁ rms 
that Husserl had shared the manuscripts from the “second part” of the  Ideen with 
him during the winter of 1924/1925, in light of which some of the criticisms to 
Husserl’s approach to personhood are now “in a certain way already somewhat 
antiquated” (ibid., 168), but his  ﬁ nal word is that still, “he hardly gets further than 
Dilthey, even though his [i.e., Husserl’s] analyses are in particular regards superior 
to his” (ibid., 173). 
 Here he is probably referring to the typed manuscript that Ludwig Landgrebe had 
just prepared based on Edith Stein’s handwritten manuscripts from 1916 and 1918. 
However, it is possible, and even probable, that Heidegger had access to the earlier 
hand-written manuscripts since they were one of the few comprehensive sets of 
manuscripts that were available when he wrote his footnote mentioning manuscripts 
Husserl had lent him in the summer of 1924. There is no doubt, however, that the 
 10  GA 56/57, 165. 
181
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
concepts and the general direction of the analyses later published as  Ideen II were 
familiar to Heidegger soon after he arrived in Freiburg, both through conversations 
and through Husserl’s lectures on “ Natur und Geist .” Since the early manuscripts on 
which the original research manuscripts of  Ideen II were based were composed 
under the heading of “ Natur und Geist ,” the question is to a certain extent moot. 
What is beyond doubt is that Heidegger was acquainted with this area of Husserl’s 
work, found it very promising and helpful, and incorporated much of what he 
learned from it into his own thinking, but that he ultimately also came to the conclu-
sion that Husserl himself remained too much under the sway of the tradition of 
modern epistemology to take full advantage of the possibilities it offered. In sum, 
Heidegger saw in both books of the  Ideen an important point of departure for his 
own work, but one which he saw himself moving beyond already in the early 20’s. 
 Husserl and Heidegger on the Ultimate Grounds for Action 
 The Fundamental Difference 
 The previous section of this chapter described how, by 1925 at the latest, Heidegger 
had come to the conclusion that, in spite of Husserl’s contributions to phenomenol-
ogy, his approach still remained too strongly oriented on the model of theoretical 
knowledge and a conception of truth that was not adequate to address questions 
about “the truth of art and religion.” He also claimed that Husserl’s his approach 
was not adequate to the primary task of phenomenology, which is “understanding 
life itself in its authentic Being and responding to the  question concerning the char-
acter of its Being ” (GA 64, 274–75), life not as an object of knowledge, but as 
something that must be enacted and accomplished. 
 The task of the remaining sections will be (1) to explain just what Heidegger has 
in mind when he criticizes Husserl’s approach to life and to other issues that he 
believes cannot be addressed adequately using models taken from theoretical knowl-
edge, (2) to identify the other genuine points of difference between them, and then 
(3) to examine the phenomenological justi ﬁ cation for the different positions that 
each of them occupies with regard to those fundamental issues. Put very brie ﬂ y, the 
remaining sections will attempt to show that the basic difference consists in their 
differing views on the possibility of a grounding for ethics, if by ethics we mean an 
inquiry into the nature and foundations for right action. Husserl contends that the 
very nature of reason involves the implicit claim that all sorts of position-takings, 
including decisions about right actions, point to the possibility of an intuition, an 
experience that can con ﬁ rm or refute the validity of that position-taking consistent 
with the intention/ful ﬁ llment structure of consciousness in general. Heidegger by 
contrast considers this an illusion about the basic questions that provide the ultimate 
grounding for action, and sees this view as an illicit reliance on a model taken from 
theoretical reason. He contends rather that authentic Dasein recognizes that Dasein 
182
T.J. Nenon
itself must take on the responsibility of providing meaning to a life, but that “no one 
and nothing” can relieve one of the burden of that choice—which is why in authentic 
Dasein, the voice of conscience that calls one to face up to this fact speaks silently 
because it cannot tell you what the right choice is. The main sources that I will use 
to highlight these differences will be Heidegger’s  Sein und Zeit and Husserl’s lec-
tures from 1920 to 1924 entitled “ Einleitung in die Ethik ” ( “Introduction to Ethics ”), 
published a few years ago as Volume XXXVII of the  Husserliana . 11 
 Heidegger on the Groundless Ground 
 Reading  Sein und Zeit in light of the line of thinking developed in the early lectures, 
it is very clear that when Heidegger criticizes earlier philosophers for having failed 
to address the question of the meaning of Being, it is the Being not of things that 
populate the world, but of the world itself, of Dasein that has been overlooked from 
his perspective. Reading the early lectures in light of the much more extensive dis-
cussion of death, conscience, resoluteness, and temporality presented in  Sein und 
Zeit allows the reader to see much better what Heidegger was thinking in the much 
briefer discussions of those topics with which he closes the 1925 lectures cited in 
the  ﬁ rst section of this chapter. The general direction of the analyses is already 
apparent in those lectures when he says that “Facing ( Vorlaufen ) death in each 
moment ( Augenblick ) of Dasein signi ﬁ es Dasein’s self-retrieval out of the They 
( Man ) in the sense of choosing oneself” (GA 20, 440) and that, “In facing its death, 
Dasein can make itself responsible in an absolute sense” (GA 20, 440–41). To argue 
that the main topic of  Sein und Zeit is the possibility of grounding an ethics is at 
least controversial, and perhaps even provocative, but it is a thesis that I will attempt 
to explain and defend in the following remarks. It is, however, not completely new; 
for instance, Francois Raffoul claimed something quite similar at OPO II in Lima 
and made a good, but slightly different case for it compared to the description I will 
lay out here. 12 
 In some ways, it is easier to see how the project of  Sein und Zeit  can appropriately 
be described as a non-metaphysical grounding of an ethics in light of the earlier 
lectures that provide some of this background to  Sein und Zeit . In general terms, one 
can see how the question that later shows up as the question of the meaning of the 
Being of beings in general and of Dasein very speci ﬁ cally and its relationship to 
originary temporality emerges against the background of questions into the proper 
kind life as a practical matter, as a choice for which one must take responsibility. My 
 11  Edmund Husserl,  Einleitung in die Ethik, Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1920/1925, Husserliana 
Band XXXVII,ed. Henning Peucker (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2004). 
 12  Francois Raffoul, “Heidegger and Ethics,”  Selected Essays from North America. Phenomenology 
2005 , Volume 5, eds. Lester Embree and Thomas Nenon (Bucharest: Zeta Books 2006), pp. 
501–22. 
183
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
claim is that, in spite of the changes in terminology, the same question is still the 
fundamental issue at stake in  Sein und Zeit . 
 Of course, we recall that Heidegger does not begin  Sein und Zeit with an analysis 
of Dasein  per se . Rather, in the First Division of  Sein und Zeit , Heidegger introduces 
the notion of world by way of an analysis of how objects within the world show up 
for us in our daily lives. The fundamental trait that this analysis reveals is that it is 
part of their very nature that they have  Bewandtnis or relevance in some way to us 
(SZ 83–85). They are meaningful not in themselves, but in reference to what can or 
cannot be done with them, how they affect us in our daily lives. “Relevance” points 
in two directions: something (an object within the world) is relevant for doing or 
accomplishing something (an activity). Hence “worldhood” is introduced by showing 
how things we encounter in our daily lives are organized around the way they  ﬁ t 
into our goals and are well or ill-suited to helping us accomplish the things we want 
to do, “possibilities of Dasein” he calls them. “World” then is not a sum of objects 
within the world or a temporal-spatial realm within which objects are located, but a 
set of possibilities of Dasein that form the backdrop for how objects within the 
world appear for us. 
 Moreover, Heidegger also points to the fact that these “possibilities of Dasein,” 
as ways of doing things or reacting to things we encounter in our lives, are them-
selves organized into interrelated “contexts of meaning” ( Bedeutungszusam-
menhänge ) and that there is a hierarchical relationship between the levels of 
meaning, where objects are not only organized according to their function as means 
towards some end that is a possibility of Dasein (hammers for driving in nails, and 
homes as places to live), but that these possibilities themselves are organized into 
means/ends relationships (driving in nails to make a home, having a home to provide 
shelter, be a good investment, or impress one’s friends) in which every means 
( ein Wozu ), be it an object or an activity, points to some other activity (in the broadest 
sense whereby even having things happen to you is an activity), a way of being 
(“ Seinsweise ”), or a “possibility of Dasein” that has meaning for us and from which 
it derives the signi ﬁ cance it has, until ultimately one comes upon some possibility 
that has meaning in itself and for no other purpose outside itself (SZ 84). This is the 
 Worumwillen, the “for-the-sake-of-which,” what one might call the ultimate end or 
the highest priority in light of which all other things and activities derive the 
signi ﬁ cance that they have for Dasein (ibid.). 
 But where does this  Worumwillen come from? What provides the justi ﬁ cation for 
it? Heidegger’s analysis of fallenness suggests that in everyday life meanings seem 
just to be there “in” the things within the world or that they are social conventions 
whose substantiality (to use Hegel’s term) consists in the fact that they seem as solid 
and objective as the brilliance or hardness of a diamond because there seems to be 
no one individual to whom they can be traced back as their source, and hence no one 
who could simply revoke them and their power if he or she chose to do so. 
 What anxiety, as Heidegger describes it, reveals is that this substantiality is an 
illusion (SZ 184–88). In anxiety, things lose their meanings, their relevance becomes 
questionable or it fades away. If indeed they were as substantial as they otherwise 
might seem, this would be impossible. This does not necessarily mean that there 
184
T.J. Nenon
is not a right or a wrong answer to the question about what really is good, and of 
course it does not mean that it makes no difference which answer you choose. As 
much as anything else within the world, the answer one accepts is decisive for who 
one is and what course one’s life will take. What anxiety reveals is that no thing and 
no one can tell you the answer, can tell you what is really important, what the ultimate 
ends, the highest priorities for a life should be. If there were something or someone 
that could tell you that answer apart from a standard one has already accepted, in 
terms of which something would count as the answer, then things would once again 
regain the meaning that is missing in anxiety. But if no one and nothing can, then 
there is no  ﬁ rm ground from which to make a decision, but since each life is always 
explicitly or implicitly guided by some sense of an ultimate end or highest priority 
for a life, one cannot wait around to make a decision until such a  ﬁ rm ground 
emerges. 
 Perhaps there are other modes of access to this insight than the experience of 
anxiety as Heidegger describes it, but even if that is true, the basic point stays the 
same. No thing and no one can tell you what the ultimate norms for a life should 
be—or better put—no one can tell you who to listen to (people try to tell us all the 
time) about the ultimate norms, the highest priorities for a life, except in terms of 
ends or priorities that we have already accepted as valid. If those are precisely what 
are in question, then this is indeed a rather unsettling experience, especially if you 
would like to have something solid and substantial to tell you what is and is not 
good and important, and thereby to provide a reliable guide for action. 
 In everyday life, it looks like the answer is settled or at least like there is some 
 ﬁ rm ground for settling the issue. I take it that one of the main differences between 
authentic and inauthentic being-a-self is that in authentic being-a-self, one is aware 
that there is no  ﬁ rm ground outside of oneself to which one can appeal to  ﬁ nd out 
what the ultimate end or the highest priority for a life should be. For Heidegger, the 
question of the good is the question of what is important  in life . And once again, we 
recall that, already in the First Part, Heidegger had suggested that no one (the They) 
and nothing (no being within the world or any feature of it apart from the relevance 
we give it in light of the signi ﬁ cance we attach to the possibilities of Dasein that it 
furthers or hinders) can tell us the answer. In fact, even the call of conscience that 
Heidegger sees as calling one to authentic existence, speaks “silently” for precisely 
this reason (SZ 277, 296). If conscience could tell us the answer, then a force out-
side of ourselves other than Dasein, and not Dasein itself, would be the source of 
meaning and direction. 
 So if there is an answer, it has to be one for which I am responsible. Even if I 
choose an answer that I take from someone or somewhere else—revealed religion, 
the traditions of my ethnic background or my family, my friends, my teachers—, 
then it is I who have done so and no one else. The fact that I am the one who accepts 
this answer that sets the overall priorities in my life and has a certain view about the 
signi ﬁ cance of events and things within the world for me, Heidegger terms—I do 
not think, inappropriately—“freedom” (SZ 266; cf.  WdGr 51), moreover not just 
freedom in general, but “freedom towards death.” 
185
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
 Why does he call it “freedom towards death”? I would like to suggest that this is 
intimately connected with the way that Dasein is the ground of its choices through 
the adoption of a  Worumwillen that, precisely because it is ultimate, cannot be 
grounded in anything else. It is freedom, among other things, because it involves a 
choice and because no one and nothing can determine this choice for Dasein. It is 
appropriately called “freedom” because it is about a choice, and it is about a choice 
that is not determined outside of Dasein. It does indeed have ontological signi ﬁ cance 
because it sets the context against which things can show up as the kinds of things 
they are, but since what it above all concerns is the “ Worumwillen ” of a life that is 
Dasein’s own, this is not a matter of theoretical classi ﬁ cation as much as it is about 
what things matter and what things do not, and how they matter—whether they are 
to be embraced or avoided, valued or shunned. And it not only has practical implica-
tions, but if this is right, it is this primary or original choice that determines what 
one should and must do. If the examples of “ways to be” are taken simply from the 
everyday activities of Dasein, then the kind of practical concerns one is describing 
are things like “building a house” or “being a chemist” whose value is presupposed, 
and the predicates for objects within the world are simply utility-characteristics. But 
if, in authentic Dasein, what one realizes is that the question is what gives meaning 
to a life, then the question goes far beyond utility and what is up for debate is not 
just how best to accomplish a given aim, but rather what the proper aim for a life in 
general is. 
 To say that it is “freedom towards death” is another way of stating what he calls 
in  Wesen des Grundes the “ ﬁ nitude” of human freedom. In that essay, the  ﬁ nitude is 
connected with the fact that freedom is something that “happens to us,” and that 
our choices are “ ﬁ nite.” This explains why he says that freedom is not only the 
“ground,” but also the “ Ab-grund ” (“abyss”) of Dasein, that it is the “ Ohnmacht ” 
(powerlessness) because it is not in Dasein’s control whether this originary event 
occurs. Dasein projects ( entwirft ), en-visages a  Worumwillen , but it does so as 
thrown, which is the  ﬁ rst limitation. Dasein does not get to decide its starting point 
or its circumstances. For instance, I did not choose to be born into a modern techno-
logical age any more than a ancient Greek chose not to, but our possibilities are 
very different nonetheless and both of us must still make choices about the ultimate 
priorities for our lives within each of those different contexts. Moreover, Dasein is 
also not free not to choose, Dasein does not get to decide whether to set a highest 
priority for itself or not; and, at any point where the moment of authentic decision 
arrives, Dasein discovers that it has already been making this basic decision all 
along whether it knew it or not. In  Sein und Zeit , the  ﬁ nitude that I am or rather enact 
at each moment (what he calls “being-towards-the-end” or “constantly dying”), is 
brought out by such phrases as the “impossibility of Dasein,” or my being “ das 
(nichtige) Grund-sein einer Nichtigkeit ” (SZ 285). Finally, setting an end or a goal 
for a life does not necessarily mean one will achieve that goal. 
 Heidegger stresses that Dasein never has complete control over its existence, 
making clear that even authentic Dasein is not synonymous with a kind of self-
consciousness that is completely autonomous and transparent to itself. It is not a 
subject conceived of in the modern sense. Rather human life as Dasein is always the 
186
T.J. Nenon
choice about priorities that it does not make all on its own, but rather “adopts,” 
“appropriates,” “takes on.” Moreover, it is also limited through the fact that the choice, 
as a genuine choice, means that to choose it involves failing to choose another. If I set 
 ﬁ nancial success as my highest goal, I have not made having time for my family, 
pursuing knowledge for its own sake, or sense pleasures my highest goal. If I adopt 
one of the others as my highest goal, then I have not chosen  ﬁ nancial success as 
my highest priority and thereby make it much less likely that I will actually achieve it. 
If I choose a balance of  ﬁ nancial success, professional satisfaction, and contributions 
to my family and my community as my highest priority, I am likely to be less 
successful at any one of them than I would be if I made that one my exclusive priority. 
“Freedom however exists only in the choice of the one, that means in bearing the 
not-having chosen, and not-having-been-able-to-choose the other” (SZ 285). 
 The  ﬁ nitude of freedom also means that fallenness is not an accident because to 
live is to act in a concrete setting that involves interaction with things in the 
world (that are not under my complete control) and other people. It involves not just 
holding possibilities open as such, but also necessarily seizing one of them not 
just as a possibility but as the actual priority that guides my actions and my refraining 
from acting and thereby becomes part of something concrete as well—or if I fail to 
do so, then the abstract choice of holding open possibilities is my highest priority, 
whose choice prevents me from seizing upon any one of them, and this is in itself a 
concrete course of action or “inaction” that I have chosen. 
 Is there any way of knowing what will happen if I make one sort of life my ultimate 
priority instead of another. For Heidegger, the answer is no. Is there someone who 
can tell me the answer? Again, the answer is no. It is something for which each 
individual must take responsibility. And are there any facts in the world that can tell 
me what matters, what makes a life meaningful? This is for Heidegger the most 
important question and what we have been suggesting is that the answer here is once 
again no, but that the decision about what is to count as signi ﬁ cant is the most 
important question there is and that it is the ground of all other signi ﬁ cance and 
relevance of events and things that happen in the world, which is to say within one’s 
life. That is why I have been arguing that for Heidegger the most important question 
in ethics is one that one can only face authentically when one recognizes that Dasein 
is the groundless ground of all meaning in the world and that what counts as right 
and wrong is decided by Dasein’s resolute commitment (he calls it a “projection”) 
to the goodness of a speci ﬁ c form of life that it recognizes is just one possibility 
among many. This is then anything but a theoretical question and there is no “fact,” 
nothing that theoretical reason or anything like it can contribute to the solution or 
grounding of the answer to this question. 
 Husserl on the Ultimate Grounds of Ethics 
 Husserl’s project in his  Einleitung in die Ethik  lectures, by contrast, is to show how 
moral and ethical reasoning functions in ways that parallel theoretical reason. The 
general program of a Husserlian ethics could hence be described as the programmatic 
187
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
attempt to show that there are structures of reason within the practical and axiological 
spheres that are analogous to those within the sphere of theoretical reason, and he 
even provides a relatively speci ﬁ c example of this parallel in a passage from the 
lectures that deserves to be quoted in its entirety:
 Indeed we have spoken repeatedly about a distinction within the sphere of emotional acts 
that we called evaluative acts of feeling that precisely parallels the distinction between 
judgments of opinion and judgments based on insight that are grasped as the truth. We just 
need to emphasize that these are not passive graspings of value, but rather acts that have 
been performed by the I. We can say that the so-called grasping of value, of which it is said 
that it is a loving grasping of value, in which the value itself is comprehended and possessed 
is the originary acquisition through a conscious act as opposed to a mere opining its value, 
this I’s act of loving, looking forward to something etc. that just opines it as something to 
look forward to, considers it lovable, but has not appropriated the value in an originary way 
and in itself—or in the opposite case, has experienced a rejection, a disappointment when 
the I in the attempt at originary appropriation experiences that the thing that was valued is 
in truth not something pleasant, that the thing that was considered beautiful is a piece of 
awful kitsch, etc. In the same way in the sphere of willing, there is a new kind of motivating 
acts for practical decisions just as there are for acts of believing and in acts of valuing. 
(XXXVII, 120) 
 “Reason” in the practical sphere is not, therefore, a matter of theoretical calcula-
tion or of the intellect alone. It is the self’s directedness towards appropriate experi-
ences and intuitions that can serve as con ﬁ rmation for the purportedly beautiful or 
valuable in the aesthetic or the good in the ethical sphere. It is also clear how reason 
is not the opposite of feelings. Rather it is the search for appropriate feelings and 
dispositions for acting. For Husserl, not all feelings are created equal and not every 
feeling is  sui generis pathological in a Kantian sense. For him, the question is not 
how to have pure practical reason trump all of our inclinations, but rather how to 
sort out the appropriate from inappropriate inclinations. In fact, Husserl believes 
that all actions are motivated by feelings: “Mere understanding is not practical. 
Only feelings can determine actions” (XXXVII, 170), and further,
 Human beings’ practical conduct is manifestly determined by feeling. If we attempted to 
extinguish all feeling from the human breast, then concepts such as end and means, good 
and bad, virtue and vice and all of the concepts that belong to them would lose their mean-
ing. Human beings would not then be striving, willing, acting beings anymore. We must 
then have recourse to feelings and more precisely investigate them, in order to be able to 
clarify the sense of ethical concepts and to study human beings as ethical beings, to clarify 
the uniqueness of their moral conduct, and to provide grounding for the ethical laws that 
explain it. (XXXVII, 148) 
 Even Kant recognizes that feelings must play a central role in ethical life when 
he acknowledges that the awareness of the obligatory character of the moral law 
gives rise to the feeling of respect that motivates a person to act in a manner consis-
tent with the law, but Husserl wants to recognize a much wider range of acceptable 
feelings as appropriate motivating factors for rational agents. He mentions approval 
and disapproval, but also love—love of oneself and love of others—and “ Seligkeit ,” 
two concepts that he adopts from Fichte, and some of his other examples seem to 
point to feelings such as pride, a sense of accomplishment, and others that could be 
legitimate reasons to act ethically as well. 
188
T.J. Nenon
 Even though Husserl disagrees with Kant on the role and range of feelings in 
ethical decision-making, he does agree with him on one point, namely that the fun-
damental concept of an ethical life as rational is duty, and that duty involves the 
decision-making that any rational agent should in principle be able to accept as 
appropriate in these speci ﬁ c circumstances. Husserl is not a formalist, among other 
things because he believes that the speci ﬁ c circumstances and limitations do matter 
in ethical decision-making, but he believes that it is inconsistent with morality for 
an agent to place a higher priority on his or her own speci ﬁ c ends or perspective than 
to those of other rational agents. Here again he sees a parallel with theoretical truths. 
People often disagree even about fairly basic matters of fact and often have their 
own individual views about them, but from Husserl’s perspective that does not mean 
that they are all correct or that none of them are. So too in the moral realm the idea 
of a moral ought or duty means:
 … that every moral judgment does not merely express a subjective feeling and not even just 
the general fact that every normal human beings in fact tends to feel and act this way, but 
rather that according to its very sense contains the claim that the particular practical conduct 
is correct or incorrect … Moral truth includes just as every mathematical and every other 
judgment the sense that whoever decides this way, morally, mathematically or any other 
way, decides correctly, just as falsehood includes the sense that whoever decides this way 
decides incorrectly, in a way that is to be condemned. (XXXVII, 149) 
 He stresses a couple of pages later that there are also some signi ﬁ cant differences 
between mathematical and practical truths. For instance, mathematical truths do not 
express norms as practical truths do. However, he does agree that the very nature of 
practical reason itself dictates that everyone should recognize the truth of some 
basic practical principles such as the principle of love of neighbor ( Nächstenliebe ) 
that follows from the nature of reason itself as universal and establishes an af ﬁ nity 
to Kant’s categorical imperative, in spite of Husserl’s reservations about Kant’s 
“formalism” and Kant’s refusal to recognize moral differences among the very dif-
ferent kinds of feelings that can legitimately motivation ethical decisions beyond 
mere respect for the moral law. He agrees with Kant about the universal responsibil-
ity of all human beings to recognize these principles when he says that even the 
moral sinner can recognize the sin and know what should have been done. 
 The parallels between the theoretical and practical reason for Husserl then are 
explicit and very clear. Just as within the theoretical sphere, for Husserl reason is 
universal. In a negative sense, this means that anything that could not in general be 
compatible with the willing of other free beings is ruled out. Positively speaking, it 
means that any reasonable person should be able to agree with the rightness of prac-
tical decisions under similar circumstances. Circumstances matter for Husserl, 
including one’s historical and cultural settings against which authentically egoic 
acts are undertaken, and these include acts of valuing and willing, so different 
persons will reasonably choose differently, and what makes the decision or act right 
in a given setting is not something that the individual decides but rather discovers. 
It is something about which the person can be right or wrong and that the further 
course of experience or perhaps re ﬂ ection or discussions with others can con ﬁ rm or 
discon ﬁ rm. Although it is not theoretical insights guiding practical actions alone or 
189
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
even primarily, the structure of intention and ful ﬁ llment that Husserl identi ﬁ es with 
the sphere of theoretical reason as the rational ground of theoretical judgments has 
parallels in notions of right valuing and right action that  ﬁ nd con ﬁ rmation or 
discon ﬁ rmation through the further course of experience as well. 
 The Question Itself: Grounding Ultimate Grounds? 
 We recall Heidegger’s frequent comments described in the  ﬁ rst section about the 
extent to which both he and Husserl share much are common in their investigations. 
Both are working within the general framework of transcendental phenomenology 
according to which objects (along with events and actions) present themselves to us 
in various ways according to the meanings that they have for us. Both begin with an 
analysis of our everyday experience of things instead of adopting assumptions about 
objects and their properties from the natural sciences, maintaining rather that the 
natural sciences are abstractions from and derivative of the experience of things in 
our daily lives. Moreover, it is also clear that for both of them, our primary access 
to objects within the world in our daily lives is not primarily in terms of their mere 
perceptual features but rather in terms of the values and uses they have for us. 13 Both 
recognize that these common meanings are at  ﬁ rst taken from a shared background 
of understanding that has both a historical and a social dimension. 
 For Heidegger, these issues addressed in his descriptions of  Be ﬁ ndlichkeit or 
 Geworfenheit and of the “They” (“ das Man ”) of the self in everyday life. For 
Husserl, they are described in genetic accounts of the establishment of sedimented 
tendencies in believing, valuing, and willing throughout the course of a life and in 
his descriptions of the  Umwelt as originally social in  Ideen II. It is also true that both 
Husserl and Heidegger believe that what Husserl calls persons, beings who have the 
form of being that Heidegger calls  Dasein , possess the ability and even the respon-
sibility to move beyond these sedimented histories and shared assumptions about 
what is true, valuable, and good through what Husserl calls authentically egoic acts 
or what Heidegger calls authentic existence. Hence, for both of them the question 
about the ultimate grounds of practice and values are at the heart of the philosophical 
concerns as of the early 1920s at the latest. What are the standards to be applied 
when one is asking about what is truly good? 
 This chapter has attempted to show that Heidegger correctly identi ﬁ es a funda-
mental and important point of difference between them. When he argues that Husserl 
is too much oriented on the model of the science and the theoretical realm that 
cannot appropriately deal with questions about the truth of art and religion, I am 
suggesting that what is really at issue is the question about the ultimate principles 
 13  I have attempted to document and describe these commonalities in more detail in Nenon, 
“Husserl’s and Heidegger’s Conceptions of the  Umwelt ,”  Hermeneutical Heidegger , eds. Ingo 
Farin and Michael Bowler (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, forthcoming 2013). 
190
T.J. Nenon
for practice, for actions, and whether they can be justi ﬁ ed in ways that parallel 
justi ﬁ cation of theoretical beliefs or not. Heidegger thinks not; Husserl believes that 
they must be. For Husserl, responsibility involves critical re ﬂ ection on and submission 
to the constraints of practical reason through respect for universality and the 
constant reexamination of sedimented values and tendencies to action through 
the con ﬁ rmation that appropriate kinds of experiences or intuitions provide. For 
Heidegger, responsibility means recognizing that these are fundamental choices for 
which no one and nothing else can provide justi ﬁ cation, that these choices must be 
resolutely faced as “projections” of Dasein. This is what authentic futurity entails 
and why he calls this feature of human existence originary temporality. 
 Heidegger not only notes the differences, but claims that Husserl is mistaken. Is 
there a way to decide? In the concluding paragraphs of this chapter, I would like to 
re ﬂ ect on our experience of setting or accepting ultimate priorities for life and see if 
we cannot  ﬁ nd examples that might lead each of them to the insights that they 
articulate. At the same time, however, I think that these examples also illustrate the 
problematic character of both of the alternatives as they describe them. Since antiq-
uity, one way of marking differences between lives governed by different priorities 
is in terms of the professions they pursue. In Plato, the common examples we  ﬁ nd 
are the lives guided by the appetitites, namely the merchants’ and craftsmen’s; those 
guided by a sense of honor, the guardians’; and those guided by the search for truth, 
i.e., the philosophers’. Some contemporary examples might be those persons whose 
highest priority is physical  ﬁ tness and attractiveness, those whose highest priority is 
 ﬁ nancial success, and those interested in learning and education. Most of the readers 
of this chapter will belong to the third group. If you picked academic philosophy as 
your profession, it is clear that  ﬁ nancial success was not your highest priority. Some 
academics and some people with a great deal of money and leisure time might 
spend much of their time and efforts on physical  ﬁ tness and attractiveness, but a 
glance around the room at most philosophy conferences and many business confer-
ences suggests that most do not. What is it that a member of one of these groups 
would say to the member of another group that would make that person come to the 
conclusion that the life that he or she has hitherto considered superior is actually 
inferior? Heidegger’s analysis would suggest that there is nothing one could point 
to unless that person were already inclined to see those features of a life as an inte-
gral part of a good life, and I think he is right about that. 
 Academics might point to the relative autonomy of academic life or the joy of 
continued learning. To the extent that members of the other groups  ﬁ nd these things 
attractive and important, this might help convince them of some of the virtues of 
academic life, but unless these are higher priorities for them than physical  ﬁ tness or 
 ﬁ nancial success, they are unlikely to have a signi ﬁ cant effect on those other per-
sons’ highest priorities. To put it a different way: I think that Heidegger is correct in 
recognizing that there is no fact that by itself can show something is valuable or 
good without some other prior commitment to the goodness or value of something 
that this instantiates or fosters. Or to put it in philosophers’ language: you cannot 
derive an “ought” from an “is” without some implicit attachment to another “ought.” 
I think this is the phenomenon that Heidegger captures when he claims that “no one 
191
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
and no thing within the world” can tell us the correct priorities for a life. That is 
why, over the course of the last few years during which I have had many more 
interactions with persons who have not chosen academia as a profession, I have 
come to believe that there really is nothing that I can say that will make them come 
to believe that my priorities are the right ones and theirs the wrong ones; and, for 
me at least, the converse holds as well. 
 So the notion of some standard or experience that could demand universal agree-
ment about priorities seems mistaken to me. Perhaps that is one reason why, except 
for formal principles such as respect for other persons, Husserl himself fails to 
provide a normative ethics, and that where he does move in that direction by 
praising the virtues of the arts or learning over other more “base” activities, the case 
he makes for them seems weak, and seems more to represent the consensus of a 
speci ﬁ c society (Germany) at a speci ﬁ c time (late nineteenth, early twentieth 
century) than a universal principle. 
 At the same time, however, I do think that Husserl is correct when he emphasizes 
that we do not believe something is preferable because we prefer it, but that we 
prefer something because we  ﬁ nd it preferable. I think it belongs to the phenomenon 
of seeing something as good or valuable that we sense ourselves as recognizing, not 
making it. I think that I recognize something about the goodness of continuing 
learning that I think other people miss. They are sure that they are recognizing 
something about the importance of physical attractiveness or great wealth that I miss. 
We have different priorities because we see things differently. This is, I think, what 
Husserl means when he says that recognizing values and goods are “intuitions.” 
From the perspective of the person “choosing” a life, they are choosing it because 
they  recognize it as the best. 
 What I am less sure about for these ultimate priorities is what would count as 
“discon ﬁ rmation” or “disappointment.” The obvious candidates for such examples 
fail, in my view. Someone might aspire to the academic life and seek a position in 
academic philosophy because he or she is convinced that it is a domain  ﬁ lled with 
persons devoted as that person is to truth and the dissemination of learning. After a 
few years in a dysfunctional department or after several experiences with colleagues 
or administrators interested much more in self-aggrandizement or power than in 
education and learning, this person might decide that the decision was a mistake. 
That would  ﬁ t the description of an experience of disappointment that would be 
consistent with Husserl’s claim that I can be mistaken about the value or goodness 
of something, namely a career in academia. Nonetheless, I do not think that this is 
a case where one becomes convinced that one’s ultimate ends or priorities in life 
are mistaken—just an example of a case in which one learns that the means one 
pursued to achieve those priorities was mistaken or at least less suited to them than 
one had expected. 
 Perhaps there is another kind of example that really does have to do with the ends 
themselves. Think of the case where a young man was sure that life-long learning 
and education were goals worthy of a life’s devotion, but later comes to wonder 
about that in light of the hardships and frustrations he experiences along the way. 
Maybe he then begins to reconsider whether he really is so committed to this goal 
192
T.J. Nenon
that it is worth sacri ﬁ cing  ﬁ nancial opportunities he might otherwise have. This 
seems to be a case where the experience of the life as a whole, not just as an envis-
aged end in the abstract, but as a concrete event, does not seem to be measuring up 
to one’s expectations. It is not any one thing that causes this change of heart, but the 
experience of all the things that happen along the way. 
 On the one hand, this does seem to  ﬁ t fairly well with Husserl’s descriptions 
of “disappointments” or “refutations” within the practical realm, but this kind of 
example suggests that there are still very important differences between disappoint-
ments within the practical realm and those within the theoretical realm. We are 
well aware that the life that one person  ﬁ nds ful ﬁ lling might not seem so to another 
person, and that one person will  ﬁ nd the dif ﬁ cult sides of a particular life very 
frustrating, but another person might  ﬁ nd them quite bearable compared to the 
satisfactions that this life has to offer—something that Heidegger’s account handles 
much better than Husserl’s. 
 However, it is important to distinguish between one’s satisfaction with a life 
in light of certain priorities that one has, and the question of whether these pri-
orities are the right ones for a human life. In the latter case, the decision is not 
whether a speci ﬁ c goal can be achieved or not, or whether different people have 
different goals or not, but whether there is some measure for whether one has 
the right goals, the right priorities for a life in general. On one point, Husserl 
and Heidegger would agree, namely that this measure does not show itself 
through something outside of life itself, but within the life-experience of individual 
human beings. 
 The question is whether it makes sense to think of the answer to this question 
not just in terms of the general structure of intention and ful ﬁ llment, but whether 
the model of ful ﬁ llment (or disappointment) from the theoretical realm is appli-
cable here as well, in particular whether what one person learns and experiences 
is generalizable for experience in general in a way that is similar to way that 
ful ﬁ llments in the theoretical realm purport to hold for everyone in similar 
circumstances. My own view is that Heidegger is correct when he claims that 
ultimate ends are foundational in a way that makes them signi ﬁ cantly different 
from claims about theoretical states of affairs and even of practical judgments 
about means and ends. I think that what I or anyone else comes to view as the 
appropriate priorities for a life under certain circumstances will not always or 
even normally seem compelling to others. However, I still disagree with 
Heidegger’s description of these ultimate priorities as mere “projections” instead 
of what present themselves to us as insights. Even if do not necessarily expect 
others to share my insights, I do believe that they are valid, that my own experi-
ence con ﬁ rms their validity, and that they therefore do not operate completely 
outside the intention/ful ﬁ llment structure. The fact that not all people share 
these insights does not make them seem less compelling for the person who has 
them. I would argue that these kinds of insights resemble theoretical insights to 
the extent that the act of seeing, the noesis,—in this case the recognition of the 
valuable and the good—, is directed to what is seen, the noema—in this case the 
truly valuable and the good. We prefer this life over that because we really do 
193
11 Martin Heidegger and Grounding of Ethics
think it is more valuable and better—a fundamentally Platonic position perhaps. 
But whereas Plato could claim that the recognition of the good is a kind of  theo-
rein because there is something to be seen there, it is hard to think of an example 
of con ﬁ rmation or discon ﬁ rmation for ultimate ends that is akin to that of theo-
retical intentions if these ultimate ends are, to use Heidegger’s language, not 
anything that resides within the world, but rather constitute the meaningfulness 
of the world as such.  
195
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_12, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The Impact of  Ideen I 
 Aron Gurwitsch was an important expositor of Husserl’s philosophy. But most of 
his written expositions of Husserl were not made for their own sake, and rather 
served to set the context for his original contributions to phenomenology. 
Gurwitsch was inspired to devote his career to advancing phenomenology by a 
deep impact that Husserl and his philosophy had on him. As he told it, “when the 
author made his  ﬁ rst acquaintance with Husserl’s philosophy about 40 years ago 
[probably 1922], he was overwhelmed by the spirit of uncompromising integrity 
and radical philosophical responsibility, by the total devotedness which made the 
man disappear behind his work. Soon the young beginner came to realize the 
fruitfulness both of what Husserl had actually accomplished and of what he had 
initiated, the promise of further fruitful work.” 1 He went on to explain how 
Husserl’s writings presented the “promise” of future work, and speci ﬁ cally 
named  Ideen as a source of his inspiration: “In  Ideen zu einer reinen 
Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie Husserl had disclosed a 
vast  ﬁ eld of research and had indicated approaches and methods of analysis by 
means of which results of enduring value could be obtained.” 2 Also, “It was the 
style of Husserl’s philosophizing, painstaking analytical work on concrete prob-
lems and phenomena rather than the opening up of grand vistas, that made the 
 Chapter 12 
 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence 
of the Physical 
 William  R.  McKenna  
 W. R.  McKenna (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Miami University ,  Oxford ,  OH ,  USA 
e-mail:  mckennwr@muohio.edu 
 1  Aron Gurwitsch,  Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1966), xv-xvi, hereafter  Studies ;  The Collected Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–
1973) , vol. II,  Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology , Phaenomenologica 193, ed. F. Kersten, 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2010). 
 2  Ibid., xvi. 
196
W.R. McKenna
young student take the decision to devote his life and work to the continuation 
and expansion of Husserl’s phenomenology—in a word, to become a disciple 
forever, faithful to Husserl’s sprit and general orientation.” 3 But he quali ﬁ ed this 
“faithfulness” by saying that he was “prepared to depart from particular theories 
if compelled to do so by the nature of the problems and the logic of the theoretical 
situation.” 4 And Gurwitsch did just this. He appropriated Husserl’s phenomenol-
ogy and developed his own thoughts as alternatives to or corrections of Husserl. 
This was particularly true in the case of some of the concepts and theories that 
Husserl communicated in the  Ideen.  
 The concern here is not to detail Gurwitsch’s contribution to Husserlian phenom-
enology, but there is an aspect of it that is useful for showing the speci ﬁ c impact of 
 Ideen on Gurwitsch. 5 Husserl’s work presented in  Ideen provided a place for 
Gurwitsch to develop theories and concepts that he had been working with before 
the encounter with Husserl, especially his work with Gestalt psychology. 6 Gurwitsch 
explained the rationale for bringing the work from these different  ﬁ elds together in 
this way:
 The differences between Gestalt theory and phenomenology are indisputable and have their 
basis in the fact that Gestalt theory is psychology, while Husserl’s phenomenology aims at, 
and prepares the ground for, a universal philosophical science. Notwithstanding these 
differences resulting from divergences of general theoretical orientation, there is a common 
ground for these two lines of inquiry upon which they meet one another and upon which they 
can be further developed, the one with the help of the other. Precisely the problems dealt with 
in the  ﬁ rst and, up to now, only volume of the  Ideen lie upon this common ground. 7  
 The most signi ﬁ cant parts of this “common ground” within Husserl’s work 
were the descriptive study of consciousness, particularly as being carried out 
under the phenomenological reduction, and the concept of intentionality, 
particularly as conceived in the form of the noetic-noematic correlation. But the 
common ground did not totally preexist as “common” and needed to be prepared. 
Gurwitsch explained this in a passage where he wrote in general about his 
approach to using work from different areas and  ﬁ elds to further phenomenol-
ogy: “The integration into the context of constitutive phenomenology of results 
and theories which have been developed within a different context and in a 
different general orientation will, of course, entail something other than simple 
 3  Ibid. 
 4  Ibid. 
 5  For some recent accounts of Gurwitsch’s impact on Husserlian phenomenology, see “Editorial 
Introduction,”  The Collected Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973) , Vol. 3, ed. Richard M. Zaner 
and Lester Embree (Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), hereafter  CW III ; Peter M. Chukwu,  Competing 
Interpretations of Husserl’s Noema, Gurwitsch versus Smith and MacIntyre (New York: Peter 
Lang, 2009); and Lester Embree, “Aron Gurwitsch’s Theory of Cultural-Scienti ﬁ c Phenomenological 
Psychology,”  Husserl Studies 19 (2003): 43–70. 
 6  In addition to Gestalt psychology, Gurwitsch brought his background in the work of people in 
other areas to bear on phenomenology. See  Studies, xx–xxii. 
 7  Aron Gurwitsch, “Critical Study of Husserl’s Nachwort,”  Studies , 113–14. 
197
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
acceptance. They will have to be adapted to the new context by means of being 
reinterpreted in phenomenological terms.” 8 Explaining further how he worked 
to “interpret phenomenologically certain psychological theories as well as to 
use them for the advancement of phenomenological problems,” he wrote, “Here, 
psychology is not looked at from without; rather the psychological theories are 
received into the philosophical context and are made instruments, not objects, 
of analysis.” 9 In preparing the common ground, for example, Gurwitsch inter-
preted Gestalt theory’s dismissal of the constancy-hypothesis “as an  incipient 
phenomenological reduction.” 10 Moves like this show us that the impact of 
Husserl’s work in the  Ideen on Gurwitsch was to provide him with a way to 
make contributions to  philosophy with psychology. 
 For the sake of completeness it should be mentioned that the preparation of 
the common ground entailed more than changes to the psychological side. 
Gurwitsch also used the notion of “reinterpretation” to describe how he changed 
some of Husserl’s theories to adapt to Gestalt theory because he thought the 
latter better accounted for the phenomena. He did this most notably in connection 
with his  ﬁ nding that Husserl’s treatment of the relationship between sense 
data (hyletic data) and their noetic interpretations showed that the constancy hypoth-
esis, which should have been excluded by the Husserlian phenomenological 
reduction, “surreptitiously intervenes in phenomenological investigations” 
( Field , 271;  CW III , 262). This led Gurwitsch to make some changes in two key 
parts of Husserl’s theory: “Husserl’s theory of the inner horizon, it seems to us, 
must be reinterpreted in Gestalt theoretical terms. The concept of intentionality 
fundamental to phenomenology, must also undergo a reinterpretation so as to 
become independent of the dualistic conception of consciousness with which it 
appears somehow connected in Husserl’s theory” ( Field , 272–73;  CW III , 264). 
This preparation of the common ground allowed Gurwitsch to utilize notions 
from Gestalt theory to describe the organization of the perceptual noema. To do 
this, Gurwitsch relocated sense data from the noetic side of the noeto-noematic 
correlation, where Husserl had them, into the noema itself ( Field , 269;  CW III , 
260–61). In Husserl’s descriptions, the same sense data (thought to be within the 
noetic side of consciousness) could undergo different interpretations and them-
selves remain unaltered by the difference in interpretations. Relocating the sense 
data into the noematic side of consciousness, where they are parts of a Gestalt 
 8  Studies , xxi. 
 9  Ibid. 
 10  Aron Gurwitsch,  The Field of Consciousness (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1964), 
168, hereafter  Field ;  CW III , 162. This work has been reprinted in Volume III of  The Collected 
Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973), Vol. 3, ed. Richard M. Zaner and Lester Embree (Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2010). To use the “constancy hypothesis” is to think that “ sense-data depend entirely 
upon, and are determined exclusively by, the corresponding physical stimuli ” so that “ whenever 
the same physical events stimulate the same elements of the nervous system, the same sensation 
cannot fail to appear ” ( Field , 90;  CW III , 88). 
198
W.R. McKenna
contexture and thereby intrinsically affected by the prevailing noetic interpretation, 
allowed Gurwitsch to show how they could be altered, as part of what appeared, 
by the noetic functions operating in conformity with Gestalt theoretical organi-
zational principles ( Field , 269–72;  CW III , 260–64). 
 In making this change, Gurwitsch pursued an aspect of experience on the 
noematic side that Husserl often did not pursue. In the work he published in his 
lifetime, Husserl emphasized what I would call the “ontological” dimension of 
the noema. This is a concern with  what the object is taken to be in a given expe-
rience of it and along with the properties and relations it is experienced to have 
(for example, a “bright blue” “book” “on the desk”). Within this dimension 
there is no place for sensory data. The “bright blue” that is experienced, for 
example, is the bright blue color that is a property of the object. Imagine that a 
dark blue sensation is experienced. Husserl could have this sensation, considered 
as part of the noetic side of consciousness, undergo two different interpreta-
tions: one that brought about the experience of an object as having a dark blue 
color; and another that brought about the experience of an object as having a 
bright blue color “covered” by a shadow. For Husserl, the dark blue sensation 
(in the noesis) remains identical throughout these two interpretations. Gurwitsch, 
on the other hand, focused on an “appearance” dimension of the noema, “relo-
cating” sense data there, and would discuss the coloration within the appearance 
itself as something appearing differently as it changes as a result of the different 
interpretations: from being experienced to be a surface phenomenon under one 
interpretation to being experienced as being part of a detached sheet of shadow 
in the second—changes that alter the coloration intrinsically, so that no identity 
is experienced. 
 Husserl was not unaware of an “appearance” dimension of the noematic side of 
consciousness, however. But he identi ﬁ ed something seemingly very different from 
what Gurwitsch focussed upon. 11 Gurwitsch seems not to have related to this aspect 
of Husserl’s work, which remained in manuscript form during Husserl’s lifetime 
and has now been published in  Husserliana , some of it after Gurwitsch died. 
Whether “Gurwitschian” phenomenology could have been further impacted by this 
work of Husserl, and in particular whether it could have become the locus of 
Gurwitsch’s Gestalt theoretical reinterpretations of Husserl, is a question I will 
leave to others to explore. 
 11  For instance, what Husserl called the “phantom,” an abstract dimension of the appearance of a 
material thing. See my “The ‘Inadequacy’ of Perceptual Experience,”  The Journal of the British 
Society for Phenomenology 12/2 (1981) and John Drummond, “Objects’ Optimal Appearances 
and the Immediate Awareness of Space in Vision,”  Man and World  16 (1983): 177–205. Most, if 
not all, of Husserl’s work on this is contained in posthumously published work in Husserliana, 
for instance in  Ding und Raum ,  Husserliana XVI , ed. Ulrich Claesges (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1973).  
199
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
 The Transcendence of Physical Things 
 Introduction 
 In §§38 and 41–44 of  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, Erstes Buch  Husserl contrasts the consciousness of physical things, as 
these things are encountered in everyday life, with the re ﬂ ective awareness of the 
consciousness of those things and with re ﬂ ective awareness of mental processes 
generally. He claims that physical things, in relation to the mental processes that are 
the consciousness of them, are “transcendent,” whereas, in relation to the re ﬂ ective 
mental processes that are the awareness of them, mental processes are “immanent,” 
being in a way a part of them. 12 The overall point of this discussion is to establish 
that the re ﬂ ective consciousness of mental processes has a certain epistemic superiority 
over sensory perception in that re ﬂ ection is indubitable, guaranteeing the existence 
of its object, whereas this is not the case with sensory perception for essential rea-
sons. 13 In the process of pursuing this goal Husserl opens a line of inquiry concerning 
the transcendence of physical things that in the end remains underdeveloped, having 
been developed by him far enough for him to make a prima facie case for the 
epistemic superiority of re ﬂ ection. But if we develop one aspect of his discussion a 
bit more, we can learn more about the sense of the transcendence of physical things 
than he makes explicit. That will be my project here. 
 Husserl in the  Ideen 
 In his discussion Husserl relates the transcendence of physical things to the fact that 
sensory perception is always perception through perspectives. He discusses the 
effects of perspectivity in two ways, only one of which turns out to bear on the tran-
scendence of physical things. One way he does this is to point out that perspectivity 
has a limiting effect on the scope of our knowledge of a thing in any given percep-
tion, since what we actually sense is only part of the object. When an object is seen 
from one point of view, for example, many of its features are not visible and we 
cannot be certain what they are like. Of course we can change our orientation with 
respect to the object and then can come to directly encounter formerly non-visible 
parts, but then the former sides disappear from view, so that the changes in orientation 
 12  See especially Edmund Husserl,  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a 
Phenomenological Philosophy , First Book, trans. F. Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers, 1982), §38, 78–80 and §42, 89–90. 
 13  Ibid., §46, 100–104. 
200
W.R. McKenna
just exchange presence and absence and consequently maintain the epistemic loss. 
Added to this is the fact that objects have a seemingly endless number of features 
that any one perception or even series of them cannot encompass, especially if we 
consider ways objects may behave in countless different circumstances. Husserl 
writes of this as an “inadequacy” of perception, and “imperfection,” although one 
that is necessary for there to be experience of a physical thing. 14 However, this kind 
of inadequacy, having to do with the scope of our knowledge, is also true of the 
re ﬂ ective experience of mental processes: “It is the case also of a mental process 
that it is never perceived completely, that it cannot be adequately seized upon in its 
full unity,” 15 so that in this respect sensory perception and re ﬂ ection are not differ-
ent. One needs then to look elsewhere for insight into how the perspectivity of 
sensory perceptions relates to the transcendence of physical things (and for its com-
parative epistemic inferiority). 
 In §§41–44 of  Ideen I , Husserl also goes into a related, but somewhat different 
issue involving perspectivity. He claims that sensory perception always involves 
“appearances,” and that as perspectives change, any physical thing as a whole, as 
well as any of its individual features, is necessarily given in different appearances, 
 none of which can be said to give the feature in an “absolute” form, i.e., to give it 
as it really is in itself. 16 Husserl explains this using the example of a violin tone:
 A violin tone … is given by adumbration, has its changing modes of appearance. These 
differ in accordance with whether I approach the violin or go farther away from it, in accor-
dance with whether I am in the concert hall itself or am listening through the closed doors, 
etc. No one mode of appearance can claim to be the one that presents the tone absolutely 
although, in accordance with my practical interests, a certain appearance has a certain pri-
macy as the normal appearance: in the concert hall and at the “right” spot I hear the tone 
“itself” as it “actually” sounds. 17 
 We can add the familiar example of the sound of a passing vehicle, which, let 
us presume, comes from behind us as we walk on the sidewalk, so that we do not 
see it. The sound “gets louder” as the vehicle approaches and there is a point 
before it passes by where we can hear it “best.” That point may not be where it is 
loudest, if our interest is in discerning what kind of vehicle it is (sedan, sports car, 
truck). Husserl also gives the example of seeing the color of a thing in normal 
daylight, as opposed to other conditions of lighting. “We say of the color … which 
we see in normal daylight …, that is how the thing actually looks; this is its actual 
color.” 18 We say the same of the volume of a sound of a steady violin tone or of an 
approaching vehicle. We hear what we take to be the  same  volume from far away 
 14  Ibid., §44, 94. 
 15  Ibid., §44, 97. 
 16  Ibid., §44, 96. 
 17  Ibid. 
 18  Ibid. This example shows that Husserl is thinking of perspectivity in a broad sense, that includes 
environmental conditions of perception. 
201
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
and then from increasingly close up, and there is a small range of distances where 
we may think that we best have a sense of what the volume is and say: “there, 
that’s how it actually sounds.” 
 Husserl contrasts this with the givenness of a mental process like a feeling: “If I 
look at it I have something absolute; it has no sides that could be presented some-
times in one mode and sometimes in another … what I see when I look at it is there, 
with its qualities, its intensity, etc., absolutely.” 19 Note that the issue of perspectivity 
here is different from the one concerning the scope of knowledge that was discussed 
above. It is not that a mental process has aspects that are not perceivable in any 
given re ﬂ ective perception of it, but that what  is perceived, unlike in the case of 
sensory perception of physical things, is not presented in different “modes.” 
However, a sound or a color appear differently depending on circumstances of per-
ception, and so, generally speaking, the way a physical thing or its features are given 
is  relative to those circumstances. Husserl’s reference to “something absolute” in 
the case of re ﬂ ection on mental processes, then, is to be understood in contrast to the 
 relativity to such circumstances. In re ﬂ ection, unlike sensory perception, instead of 
something “relative” being given, there is something non-relative, or “absolute.” Let 
us see how this relates to the issue of transcendence. 
 According to Husserl, when we think that a particular appearance, the “normal” 
appearance, is how a thing actually looks or sounds, “that points to what is only  a 
kind of secondary objectivation  within the total objectivation of the physical thing.” 20 
In this and his other comments above about the “normal” appearance Husserl is 
making two points. First, the normal appearance is just as much an appearance as 
any other. When we come to it in the series of appearances it is not as if at that point 
we are no longer experiencing the thing through an appearance and rather experi-
encing something “absolute.” What we perceive then is just as relative as at any 
other time. Second, although the normal appearance has a “certain primacy” as the 
“normal” appearance, this value is not derived from some correctness it registers in 
regard to how the thing is “in itself,” in comparison to other appearances, but from 
the interest governing our perceptual process at the moment. When Husserl calls 
our tendency to think that the normal appearance is the way the thing actually looks, 
sounds, etc. a “secondary” (or “intermediary” 21 ) objectivation this amounts to a 
critical judgment about everyday experience. We are aware of physical things and 
their features as having quite de ﬁ nite determinations: we experience the tone’s vol-
ume as unvarying but as now appearing loud, then soft; the same unchanging color 
of the object now appears one way and then another; the unchanging rectangular 
shape of a door appears with obtuse and acute corner angles from every orientation 
to us but the one when it occupies our fronto-parallel plane. We are aware of the 
constancy of the determination, of the volume, color, shape, through the appear-
ances, and from that posit it as the “in-itself” of objects and their features. But 
 19  Ibid. 
 20  Ibid. 
 21  Ibid., fn. 204. 
202
W.R. McKenna
everyday experience goes further and identi ﬁ es one appearance, the normal appearance, 
as that in-itself, as if “wanting” more, “wanting” an unmediated grasp that is then 
satis ﬁ ed by the normal appearance. 
 However satis ﬁ ed, everyday experience is with this, from a philosophically critical 
point of view, the normal appearance is just another appearance, so that when expe-
riencing it we do not possess the object as something “absolute” with the epistemic 
guarantee that comes with that. With this result, Husserl leaves the discussion of the 
normal appearance in  Ideen I and continues to develop the epistemological and 
ontological consequences of this critique, and eventually its implications for the 
re ﬂ ective philosophical method of the phenomenological epochē and reduction. In 
doing this, Husserl leaves aside an opportunity for inquiry that his analysis of 
secondary objectivation has opened up. The critique shows that from a theoretical 
point of view, secondary objectivation fails to achieve that for which it strives. But 
the positing of the in-itself that the striving took up is still there with unaffected 
validity. 
 To go where Husserl did not take us, we can say from a theoretical point of view, 
that the posited in-itself  evades us in the process of secondary objectivation. It is 
there for us in the form of the constant determination through the varying appear-
ances, but in a sense it escapes us and is beyond our grasp. In this “beyond” that this 
evasion yields lies, I believe, the sense of the transcendence of physical things. In 
order to continue to proceed through this opening for analysis that Husserl has 
provided, and learn more about this transcendence, it will be helpful to look at the 
work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty, who has commented insightfully on this matter of 
the “normal appearance” and what Husserl calls “secondary objectivation.” 
 Merleau-Ponty 
 In  Phénoménologie de la perception Merleau-Ponty wrote:
 When I contemplate before me the furniture in my room, the table with its shape and size is 
for me not a law or rule governing the parade of phenomena, and an invariable relationship: 
it is because I perceive the table with its de ﬁ nite shape and size that I presume, for every 
change of distance or orientation, a corresponding change of shape and size, and not the 
reverse. Far from being the case that the thing is reducible to constant relationships, it is in 
the self-evidence of the thing that this constancy of relationships has its basis. 22 
 Here Merleau-Ponty is discussing the role of the “privileged perception” 
(“ perception privilégiée ”) in the organization of the perceptual process. This is the 
perception that involves the “normal appearance” discussed above. It is this “normal 
appearance” that constitutes the “evidence of the thing” mentioned in the above quote. 
 22  Maurice Merleau-Ponty,  Phenomenology of Perception , trans. Colin Smith (London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1962), 302. Cf.  Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris, Gallimard, 1945), 348. In 
the English translation, “ perception privilégiée ” is rendered “crucial perception.” 
203
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
Merleau-Ponty is discussing how, for example, a table top that is experienced to be 
rectangular (the “de ﬁ nite shape”) when seen from different orientations gives rise to 
appearances of the table top that has acute and obtuse angles instead of right angles, 
and these angles change in regular ways as the orientation changes. The “privileged 
perception” is “privileged” because it plays a special role in the organization of the 
perception of physical things: the “crucial perception ensures the unity of the per-
ceptual process and draws into it all other appearances.” 23 
 In the context of the long passage quoted above, Merleau-Ponty is involved in 
refuting two theories, both of which seek to explain how we experience objects as 
having determinate sizes and shapes. The  ﬁ rst theory asserts that one size and shape, 
from among the many that are presented to us as our perspective on an object varies, 
becomes conventionally regarded as the true size and shape, for example, the size an 
object appears to have when it is within reach, and the shape it looks to have when 
it is oriented in our frontal-parallel plane. 24 The second theory states that size and 
shape are actually not perceived as attributes of a single object at all, and that they 
are just names for the relations between parts of the phenomenal  ﬁ eld. 25 The true 
size or shape of an object is just a constant law governing varying appearances, 
distances, and orientations. 26 Merleau-Ponty  ﬁ nds that both of these theories pre-
suppose what they are to account for, namely, how there are  determinate shapes and 
sizes at all for the objects of our experience. The  ﬁ rst theory presupposes “a gamut 
of  determinate sizes and shapes from which it is suf ﬁ cient to select one as the real 
size and shape.” 27 In the second theory it is assumed that appearance, distance and 
orientation “can be treated as variables or measurable sizes, and therefore that they 
are already determinate.” 28 
 In a manner characteristic of the style of his thought, Merleau-Ponty retains 
something from both these theories and leaves behind what he  ﬁ nds objectionable 
in them. He keeps the idea of the “relations between the parts of the phenomenal 
 ﬁ eld” from the second theory, while purging the terms of the relations of their deter-
minateness. Thus:
 the distance from me to the object is not a size which increases or decreases, but a tension 
which  ﬂ uctuates round a norm. An oblique position of the object in relation to me is not 
measured by the angle which it forms with the plane of my face, but felt as a lack of bal-
ance, as an unequal distribution of its in ﬂ uences upon me. The variations in the appearance 
are not so many increases or decreases in size, or real distortions. It is simply that some-
times the parts mingle and become confused, at others they link up into a clearly articulated 
whole, and reveal their wealth of detail. There is one culminating point of my perception 
which simultaneously satis ﬁ es these three norms, and towards which the whole perceptual 
process tends. 29 
 23  Merleau-Ponty, 302. 
 24  Merleau-Ponty,  Phenomenology of Perception , 299. 
 25  Ibid., 300. 
 26  Ibid., 300–301. 
 27  Ibid., 299. 
 28  Ibid., 301. 
 29  Ibid., 302–303. 
204
W.R. McKenna
 This “culminating point” is what Merleau-Ponty retains of the  ﬁ rst theory and is 
what he calls a “privileged perception” and that he is referring to when he says, that 
“upon the evidence of the thing is founded the constancy of relations, rather than the 
thing being reduced to constant relations.” 
 Merleau-Ponty gives the example of the perception of a living body. A “living 
body,” he writes, when
 seen at too close quarters, and divorced from any background against which it can stand out, 
is no longer a living body, but a mass of matter as outlandish as a lunar landscape, as can be 
appreciated by inspecting a segment of skin through a magnifying glass. Again, seen from 
too great a distance, the body loses its living value, and is seen simply as a puppet or 
automaton. The living body  itself appears when its microstructure is neither excessively nor 
insuf ﬁ ciently visible, and this moment equally determines its real size and shape. 30 
 When Merleau-Ponty writes here of the living body “itself,” he does not mean 
that, as a person approaches me from very far away, for a while I perceive only the 
 appearance of the living body and not that living body “itself,” and then, as some 
crucial distance, there is an ontological discontinuity such that the givenness of 
appearance gives way to reality, only to yield to appearance again as I get very 
close. He knows that it is the living body of another person that is perceived all 
along. His point is that it is only from a certain distance or range of distances that 
the  aliveness of the body is given to me in an original manner, and that it is this 
perception that is the basis for my being able to see the far-off living body  appearing 
as a puppet or automaton. In his account, that appearance of the other sets what will 
be experienced as the “real” size and shape of the other person, and in this way he 
gives detail to the process of secondary objectivation. 
 Within this context Merleau-Ponty says some things that bear on the issue of 
transcendence. Writing of what we have called “secondary objectivation” he notes, 
rejecting the idea that a thing is absolutely “in-itself,” i.e., separable from a perceiving 
person, since “the thing is correlative to my body and, in more general terms, to my 
existence,” 31  since it is “the goal of a bodily teleology, the norm of our psycho-
physiological setting,” 32 Merleau-Ponty  ﬁ nds that the meaning of “the thing” is not 
exhausted by de ﬁ ning it in this way. “One cannot,” he says, “conceive any perceived 
thing without someone perceiving it. But the fact remains that the thing itself pres-
ents itself to the person who perceives it as a thing in itself, and thus poses the 
problem of a genuine  in-itself-for-us. ” 33 Here Merleau-Ponty articulates the issue 
raised earlier of the positing of the in-itself of objects and their features that remains 
after the critique of secondary objectivation. Then he expresses the sense of the 
transcendence of physical things that is connected with this positing. He says that 
the thing “holds itself aloof from us and remains self-suf ﬁ cient.” 34 “This,” he says, 
 30  Ibid., 302. 
 31  Ibid., 320. 
 32  Ibid., 322. 
 33  Ibid. 
 34  Ibid. 
205
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
“will become clear if we suspend our ordinary preoccupations and pay a metaphysical 
and disinterested attention to it [that is, move beyond our satisfaction with the normal 
appearance through philosophical critique]. It is then hostile and alien, no longer an 
interlocutor, but a resolutely silent Other, a Self which evades us no less than does 
intimacy with an outside consciousness.” 35 
 Going Further 
 In describing this “evasion” Merleau-Ponty alludes to Husserl’s discussion of the 
consciousness of the mental life of another person in the  Cartesianische Meditationen . 
The way that the mental life of another person is conscious to the person whose 
mental life it is, which would be its “in-itself,” is a way of being conscious of it that 
I am essentially incapable of having and in that sense it evades me. 36 Merleau-Ponty 
sees an evasion as complete as this in the case of the awareness of physical things. I 
 ﬁ nd in Merleau-Ponty’s description something that captures the sense in which the 
physical thing in-itself is  beyond appearances and any system of appearances, and 
is  other than appearance. Let us investigate this. 
 Imagine a tone sounding with what we take to be unvarying intensity that we hear 
at  ﬁ rst from far away and then closer up as it approaches us. There is an appearance 
content that changes, the loudness of the tone, but through this change we experi-
ence a tone unvarying in intensity but getting closer. This spatial apprehension of 
our meaning bestowal is what achieves this unvarying-but-moving-toward. Now if 
we pay attention to this varying appearance of intensity, adopting a theoretical atti-
tude, we can ask, not being satis ﬁ ed with the answer that secondary objectivation 
gives us, “What is the invariant intensity of the tone?” and mean “What does it 
sound like in-itself?” Or, imagine sitting outside at a table of a café and your awaited 
friend approaches from down the street. The size of the friend is experienced to be 
invariant throughout the changes in the “size” of the appearance of the friend. Again 
rejecting the answer of secondary objectivation, we ask: “What is the invariant size 
of the friend itself?” These questions stem from the motive for secondary objectivation, 
that directedness toward the determinate size, sound, shape, etc. When we reject the 
response of secondary objectivation, we can start by answering in this way: The 
intensity, the size, the shape, themselves, are each just that which is given as 
self-identical in and is intended through, certain particular series of appearance-
manifolds. Each one is, as it were, a kind of “X” (an unknown) in contrast to the 
knowing of it through its sensuous modes of givenness, something quite de ﬁ nite, 
 35  Ibid. 
 36  Edmund Husserl,  Cartesian Meditations , trans. Dorion Cairns (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1960), 119. 
206
W.R. McKenna
but still, elusive. Every perceived object and every perceived feature of every object 
is a different X, different from every other in being the self-identical in different 
series of appearances. 
 If we follow the analogy with the consciousness of the mental life of another 
person, then it is senseless to seek the answer to our “What is X?” question in 
some intuition that would present the object or feature of an object as it is in itself 
and apart from its presentation through appearances. However, such questions 
themselves are not meaningless. It is just that a special attitude is required which 
can take up such a question and transport us beyond the con ﬁ nes of everyday 
experience. In  Phénoménologie de la perception Merleau-Ponty is concerned 
with overcoming the prejudice of objective thought (scienti ﬁ c thought, for exam-
ple) so as to disclose a pre-objective “knowledge” of the world that underlies 
objective thought and provides a ground for it. Husserl has a similar project in  Die 
Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie . 
In the context of this project we can get insight into what “primary objectiva-
tion” could be. Primary objectivation can be thought of as the basic directedness 
toward the determinate, independently of how this directedness may be satis ﬁ ed. 
It is the deep pre-objective “knowledge” that can provide a basis for objective 
thought. Everyday life provides one way of satisfying the “desire” of this directed-
ness. By virtue of the “privileged perception” and the “normal appearance” my 
friend who is approaching from down the street has “ a size.” The question “what 
is her size?” is answered in the experience of that appearance. But there is in this 
experience no basis for objective thought. However, when we ask “what size is 
she?” and answer “ ﬁ ve feet two,” the answer implies that the basic directedness 
toward the determinate has been transported to the level of (intersubjectively) 
objective thought. The answer refers us to a standard measuring stick that anyone 
can use and get the same result and it is not relative to the circumstances of experi-
ence or to the varying interests of different persons. 
 A different analogy will perhaps be helpful here, the analogy with mass and 
weight. The mass of an object is the measure of the amount of matter that it contains. 
An object’s weight is the measure of the force exerted by gravity on the object that 
has mass. What we experience as weight is the reaction to this force against a solid 
surface (like our hands when lifting something). The mass of an object is indepen-
dent of its location, but its weight does vary with location if the strength of the local 
gravitational  ﬁ eld varies (like on the moon vs. on earth). Now, in everyday life we 
may think of what we experience as the weight of an object as an intrinsic property 
of that object, and not a relational property that varies depending on the object’s 
relation to something else. This is like thinking that objects have de ﬁ nite sizes, 
shapes, colors, etc., and that we experience these when we experience an object via 
its normal appearance. But when  ﬁ ve feet two is the way we think of an object’s 
size, we have our mental sights on something invariant in all of the changing 
appearances of our friend, including the normal appearance, something that will 
determine that  this particular set of appearances will arise given the variations within 
the relativity of the situation. This is like focusing on the mass of an object. Five 
feet two is another attempt to capture the elusive “size,” to satisfy the directedness 
207
12 Aron Gurwitsch and the Transcendence of the Physical
toward the determinate. And like mass,  ﬁ ve feet two seems to be an intrinsic 
(absolute) and not relative determination. But this is just another “secondary objec-
tivation” that is motivated by the interest to understand with precision the series of 
variations that “the same” undergoes in changing circumstances. And just like 
the normal appearance, it should not be thought of as the ultimate satisfaction of the 
“desire” of primary objectivation. 
209
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_13, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Landgrebe with Husserl 
 Edmund Husserl’s  Ideen was formative and foundational in the thinking of Ludwig 
Landgrebe (1902–1991), who worked as Husserl’s assistant for seven years (1923–
1930). The  ﬁ rst book of the  Ideen had just been reprinted in 1922, and Landgrebe 
prepared the  ﬁ nal version of  Ideen II , which in ﬂ uenced his early thinking and shaped 
the future of his work. The key to this is his understanding of the permeation or co-
constitution of nature and the human world through the body, which he derives from 
 Ideen II. He then applies this to the constitution of regional ontologies and develops 
a sense of metaphysics that is to some extent a criticism of Husserl. Here, we will 
 ﬁ rst discuss Landgrebe’s work as Husserl’s assistant particularly on  Ideen II , and 
then consider the body as nexus of nature and spirit on one level and the regions of 
material nature and human world respectively on a macrocosmic level. Finally, we 
will brie ﬂ y trace the development of Husserl’s thought that Landgrebe would witness 
during his time in Freiburg and the course this will take in his career. 
 Landgrebe’sinvolvement with the  Ideen was immediate and direct when he, on 
the recommendation of Max Scheler, left Vienna to study in Freiburg. Replacing 
Martin Heidegger, he became Edmund Husserl’s personal assistant in 1923, which 
would of ﬁ cially continue until 1928 when he had successfully defended his disser-
tation, “Wilhelm Diltheys Theorie der Geisteswissenschaften: Analyse ihrer 
Grundbegriffe.” 1 Eugen Fink then took over as Husserl’s assistant, but Landgrebe 
 D.  Marcelle ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Strayer University in Minneapolis ,  St. Louis Park ,  MN ,  USA 
e-mail:  marcelle@fau.edu 
 Chapter 13 
 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance 
of Marginal Consciousness 
 Daniel  Marcelle    
 1  In  Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung , ed . E. Husserl et al. 
(Halle: M. Niemeyer, 1928). 
210
D. Marcelle
received funding from the Emergency Association of German Science to stay 
another two years to begin working on  Erfahrung und Urteil . 2 
 As Husserl’s assistant, Landgrebe’s  ﬁ rst task was the  ﬁ nal preparation of the 
 Ideen II for publication. Edith Stein had already prepared the manuscript by tran-
scribing it from the Gabelsberger shorthand and redacting it from 1916 to 1918. In 
1923, Landgrebe took up the work where she left off and spent more than a year 
preparing it for publication. He used Stein’s second redaction and the revisions that 
Husserl had recently made on the third section. He balanced the unity and coher-
ency of the volume with Husserl’s wish that many more writings from what came to 
be known in the Husserl-Archives as the “H-folio” be included by making these 
supplemental appendices. A “clean copy” was  ﬁ nished by 1925 that was typed and 
ready for publication. Husserl continued to emend the text until 1928, when it was 
 ﬁ nally set aside only to be published posthumously in 1952 by the Husserl-Archives. 3 
From this, it is safe to say that his work on the  Ideen II was the centerpiece of 
Landgrebe’s assistantship with Husserl and that this volume and the discussions 
they had concerning it made a tremendous impact on his thinking. 
 Landgrebe’s  ﬁ rst essay, “Die Phänomenologie der Leiblichkeit und das Problem 
der Materie,” 4  concerns the role of the body in the constitution of material nature. He 
takes the interesting position of distinguishing the body as a constituted object from 
the correlative body as constituting but in a manner that erases the Cartesian and even 
Kantian distinction of subject and object: “This relation [of corporeality and material 
nature]  shatters the traditional separation of inner and outer , of an  immanence as the 
range of the subjective from a  transcendence  of objects which stand in opposition to 
it.” 5  At the heart of this distinction lies the contrast between the naturalistic and per-
sonalistic attitudes and their interaction. The problem that leads Landgrebe to this 
conclusion is the constitution of matter that begins in the natural sciences, but leads 
from there to the experience of the interwovenness of the body with material nature. 
 Since the modern period, there has been a certain preference for the objective 
descriptions of the exact sciences. Landgrebe does not see the activity of these natu-
ral sciences as the construction of the famous  Ideenkleid that Husserl develops in his 
 2  Landgrebe thanks this organization in his “Editor’s Forward to the 1948 Edition” of  Experience 
and Judgment and discusses the development of this book. See  Experience and Judgment , ed. 
Ludwig Landgrebe, trans. J. Churchill and K. Ameriks (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 
1973), 3–8 . Erfahrung und Urteil (Prague: Academia-Verlag, 1938). 
 3  The facts pertaining to the preparation of  Ideen II come from the “Translator’s Introduction” of 
 Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. Second Book: 
Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution , trans. Richard Rojcewicz and André Schuwer 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989), xi–xvi. 
 4  While this is Landgrebe’s  ﬁ rst essay, it would not be published until Eugen Fink’s Festschrift in 
1965. Ludwig Landgrebe, “The Phenomenology of Corporeality and the Problem of Matter,”  The 
Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl: Six Essays , ed. and trans. Donn Welton, (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1981), 33–49; “Die Phänomenologie der Leiblichkeit und das Problem der 
Materie,”  Beispiele: Festschrift für Eugen Fink zum 60. Geburtstag , ed. L. Landgrebe (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1965), 291–305. 
 5  Ibid., 45. Author’s emphasis. 
211
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
 Krisis , but instead the determination of a method or attitude; it is a “method-directed 
activity” primarily interested in the appearance of being that renders this appear-
ance as universal. 6 From there we begin considering how material things are consti-
tuted in consciousness as sense objects in ever-changing adumbrations. The synthesis 
of these adumbrations is correlated to the synthesis of the body’s kinaesthetic func-
tioning in head, eye, limb, and torso movements, to name a few. It is through this 
functioning that we are immersed in the causal nexus of material nature. Landgrebe 
describes this:
 The synthesis of sensations is not merely the productive accomplishment of consciousness 
related to one and the same perceptual thing in the synthesis of the impressions of the vari-
ous sensible  ﬁ elds, but rather “aesthetic” synthesis is interwoven with “causal” synthesis. 
…  Through my body I am interwoven with the causality of the thing-world . 7 
 It is in this way that there is a freedom of activity, the famous “I can,” in the pos-
sibility of exploring the object from different perspectives, nearing to it and distanc-
ing oneself from it and so on, that material nature and the body are co-constituted, 
i.e., not only are surrounding material objects constituted, but so is the body. There 
is a “reciprocal relation between the constitution of material thinghood and material 
nature, on the one hand, and the constitution of the kinaesthetic body functioning in 
it as a living body, on the other hand.” 8 It is in this way that we have an immediate 
and intuitive knowledge of nature’s matter and causality that simple external per-
ception does not afford. It is through this connection that the naturalistic attitude and 
personalistic attitude of the practical lifeworld permeate one another. We can under-
stand, then, how the naturalistic attitude is on its own an abstraction of the person-
alistic attitude attainable through a kind of forgetting or “self-oblivion” of the 
personal ego. 9 At a higher level, regions are also co-constituted in this way. 
 The naturalistic attitude and personalistic attitude have their correlates in regions 
of being, which are material nature and the human or spiritual world, respectively. 
Regions are designated by a domain of objects essentially homogeneous in terms 
of their being, structure, and mode of givenness. 10 Landgrebe emphasizes that the 
 6  Ibid., 37. There he goes on to write: “The physicist does not construct a world which would lie 
behind the world of sensible things, but instead he has developed a method which determines these 
same things and occurrences in an unconditional universal manner, which holds true for all think-
ing subjects.” 
 7  Ibid., 38–39. My emphasis. 
 8  Ibid., 39. Farther on Landgrebe writes: “This means that sensations, especially the  kinaesthesen 
belonging to them, not only constitute the material thing as the correlate to external perception, but 
also constitute the body at the same time.” 
 9  Landgrebe quotes Husserl’s  Ideen II on this point. Rojcewicz and Schuwer translate this as “self-
forgetfulness of the personal ego,” Edmund Husserl,  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology 
and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , Second Book, trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), 193. 
 10  Ludwig Landgrebe, “Regions of Being and Regional Ontologies in Husserl’s Phenomenology,” 
in  The Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl: Six Essays , ed. Donn Welton (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1981), 149–175; “Seinsregion und regionale Ontologen in Husserls 
Phänomenologie,”  Studium Generale 9 (1956): 313–34. Cf 151–53. 
212
D. Marcelle
differentiation of regions depends more on the mode of intuition through which they 
are constituted than the simple description of the kinds of beings and their differ-
ences. 11 In  Ideen II Husserl explores the constitution of three such regions of being: 
material nature, animal nature, and the human world. These three regions seem to 
be “three successively established strata of entities,” a foundational order. 12 In the 
classical sense of reductionism, material nature, which is de ﬁ ned by causality, is the 
foundational strata, upon which are founded animal nature and the human or spiri-
tual world, both of which are de ﬁ ned by motivation, but distinct in their givenness, 
which is empathetic in the  ﬁ rst case and re ﬂ ective in the second. 
 Reductionism makes sense as you go from material to animal nature, but 
Landgrebe points out that when the constitution of the human world is considered, 
“there occurs a reversal of the entire investigation.” 13 Rather, a certain priority of the 
personalistic attitude is revealed. How are we to understand this priority? We have 
to remember that we have already established above that the naturalistic attitude and 
its correlate region of material nature are only attainable through methodological 
self-forgetting. Landgrebe writes: “The reason for the priority of the ‘personalistic’ 
attitude is that it is not one which is secured by means of a methodological decision 
but rather in the way in which we are immediately conscious of ourselves and of our 
world.” 14 Thus, instead of a tripartite structure a duality is actually the case. Nature, 
it turns out, is in a constitutive sense a construct of spirit. 15 He then discusses how 
Husserl designates consciousness as the absolute being and region with an “onto-
logical priority” over nature. 16 Landgrebe sees this as a transition from a method-
ological concept of constitution to a metaphysical one. The methodological 
conception has all being as essentially being  for consciousness, whereas the meta-
physical concept is that all being is being  by means of  consciousness, that is, abso-
lute idealism. 17 
 Landgrebe, though, wants to move this priority from spirit to animal nature, that is, 
to permeation. He points out that “my immediate consciousness of myself is not sim-
ply the consciousness of myself as a positing spirit, as one who performs positing acts, 
but rather it is precisely, in itself, already a consciousness of ‘nature’ to the extent that 
I am a corporeal, sensing ego.” 18 There is a residuum of matter in perception that disal-
lows the complete reduction of nature to spirit, which is the sensuous  hylē ; it is the 
 11  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 154. On the next page he goes on to write: “It is to be noted, 
therefore, that talk about regions of being is meaningful only with reference to this necessary and 
essential correlation with the mode of consciousness in which existents of a respective region 
arrive at givenness.” 
 12  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 156. 
 13  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 166. 
 14  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 166. 
 15  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 170. 
 16  The  ﬁ nal chapter of  Ideen II is “The Ontological Priority of the Spiritual World over the 
Naturalistic.” 
 17  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 169–70. 
 18  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 173. 
213
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
interwovenness of spirit with nature that prevents the total constitution of the one from 
the other. If spirit is absolute, then it cannot have anything that is over and against it, 
much less a consciousness of affection, which sensation is. 19 Landgrebe writes:
 What is prior to each such objectivating apperception, however, is immediately sensing 
consciousness with its kinaestheses in which not only things in their modes of appearance 
are constituted for me but, also, I am conscious of myself as sensing and affected and not 
just a positing ego. 20 
 Thus, it is in the permeation of nature and spirit at the nexus of the body that has 
a primacy to which these two regions are subordinate. Landgrebe does point out that 
Husserl takes note of this in his later manuscripts and especially in his analyses of 
the lifeworld. 
 During his time with Husserl, Landgrebe witnessed Husserl’s departure from 
Cartesianism and the development of the lifeworld that would occupy him into the 
1930s. 21 Landgrebe saw the  Formale und transzendentale Logik come to completion 
as well as the beginnings of  Erfahrung und Urteil , which he would work on through 
to its publication in 1938. 22 Considering his exposure to Dilthey, it would be an 
excellent study to consider whether and in what way the problem of history would 
impact  Ideen II and  Erfahrung und Urteil through Landgrebe’s interest and 
in ﬂ uence. 23 He witnessed Martin Heidegger’s visits with Husserl throughout the 
1920s that would eventually lead to their famous falling out. He also witnessed a 
young American phenomenologist named Dorion Cairns introduce himself unex-
pectedly to Husserl in 1924. 24 Landgrebe went on to habilitate with Oskar Kraus at 
Charles University in Prague on Anton Marty’s philosophy of language in 1933. He 
stayed there working until 1939 and during this time would collaborate extensively 
with Jan Patočka in the Prague Philosophical Circle. In 1939 and 1940 Landgrebe 
traveled to Leuven, Belgium, to work with Eugen Fink at the Husserl Archive 
recently established there. 25 He worked for a private  ﬁ rm in Hamburg during the war 
and afterwards became a professor at Kiel (1947–1956). He was then called to Chair 
at Cologne and to direct the Husserl Archive established there in 1951 by the Leuven 
archive to share in the work. Landgrebe made a signi ﬁ cant impact on Husserlian 
phenomenology for the rest of his career and life. 
 19  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 170–71. 
 20  Landgrebe, “Regions of Being,” 172. 
 21  See Landgrebe’s “Husserls Abschied vom Cartesianismus,”  Philosophische Rundschau 9 (1962): 
133–77; “Husserl’s Departure from Cartesianism,”  The Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl: Six 
Essays , ed. Donn Welton, trans. R.O. Elveton (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981), 66–121. 
 22  See footnote 2 above. 
 23  In this regard, see Dieter Lohmar, “Zu der Entstehung und den Ausgangsmaterialien von Edmund 
Husserls Werk  Erfahrung und Urteil ,”  Husserl Studies 13 (1996): 31–71. 
 24  See Dorion Cairns, “Nine Fragments on Psychological Phenomenology,” ed. Lester Embree, 
Fred Kersten, and Richard M. Zaner,  Journal of Phenomenological Psychology  41 (2010): 3. Also see 
Lester Embree’s “Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and Field of Consciousness” in the present volume.  
 25  At this time Landgrebe wrote his “The World as a Phenomenological Problem,” trans. Dorion 
Cairns,  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 1/1 (1940): 38–58. 
214
D. Marcelle
 The Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness 
 One of those on whom Landgrebe made an impact is Aron Gurwitsch. In order for 
him to receive restitution money from the German government, Landgrebe testi ﬁ ed 
that Husserl would have habilitated him if he not had to  ﬂ ee Nazi Germany for 
France before World War II and hence Gurwitsch would have enjoyed an academic 
career there. Drawing a direct philosophical connection is more dif ﬁ cult, but it is 
possible to say that the phenomenological community was small and that they would 
have been familiar with one another’s contributions and efforts to promote Husserl’s 
thinking. In the following, it is interesting to point out that both shared an interest in 
the theme of the body. Rather than beginning with permeation, though, Gurwitsch 
begins from marginal consciousness. 
 When I consider my own awareness as thematic object, it is possible to notice 
three  ﬁ elds of consciousness. There is the theme of my thought, that is, the object 
I am consciously aware of. There is a kind of thematic  ﬁ eld surrounding this mate-
rial, which contributes to it in certain ways and is always relevant for it. Our 
theme here, though, is the  ﬁ nal  ﬁ eld of consciousness, which is marginal con-
sciousness. It is composed of copresent contents that are neither relevant for the 
theme, nor thematically explicit. These contents include such things as the space 
of one’s surroundings, bodily comportment and position, and the  ﬂ ow of time. For 
instance, as I sit here now with marginal consciousness as my theme, I am also 
aware of the feel of my clothes on my skin, the fact that there are other rooms 
adjoining this one, and that time is passing, although inexplicitly. It is commonly 
thought that these peripheral regions of our awareness are mere happenstance 
contents that do not make a signi ﬁ cant contribution to our conscious lives. In this 
study, I will bring out and explore  ﬁ ve important features of marginal conscious-
ness to demonstrate that these contents make signi ﬁ cant contributions to the con-
stitution of the lifeworld. First of all, these are not dumb and unorganized contents 
that they have been assumed to be, but rather are richly organized. Second, the 
awareness that we have of ourselves is in part supplied by marginal contents. 
Third, our spatial orientation is maintained in the margins. Fourth, we have a con-
stant awareness of our embodiment and bodily comportment. And  ﬁ fth, marginal 
contents of our consciousness play an important role in the constitution of our 
natural attitude. This investigation largely stands on the work of Aron Gurwitsch, 
but strives to expand and build upon it as well. 
 The “Organization” of Marginal Contents 
 First of all, we will describe the nature and organization of marginal consciousness. 
Such consciousness is de ﬁ ned by its copresence with but irrelevance for the theme. 
As the thematic  ﬁ eld is de ﬁ ned by its relevancy for the theme, marginal contents are 
215
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
de ﬁ ned by their irrelevancy. 26 The contents of the marginal horizon beyond our 
focal or attentive awareness are not materially related to the content of the theme or 
thematic  ﬁ eld in any way and do not contribute anything or have any in ﬂ uence upon 
the content of thematic consciousness. Relevance is a kind of codependence of 
objects and their contexts that respectively contribute to and determine one another 
in terms of meaning and existence. To be relevant for something is to both contrib-
ute to and be de ﬁ ned by that something. It is in this way that we can understand that 
marginal contents are irrelevant for thematic consciousness. 27 They are merely 
co-present with the theme and experienced simultaneously with it. 28 In gestalt terms, 
the margin is related to the theme by a merely summative “and-connection” 
( Undverbindung ). The importance of this relationship in this case is like elements 
being added to or grouped with one another, they maintain their identities as do 
thematic and marginal contents, which just happen to be given together. For instance, 
we can take the content of the theme and vary, imaginatively or in reality, the mar-
ginal contents of such awareness without affecting the content of the theme just so 
long as we are careful not to make such marginal contents themselves thematic, 
which would lead to a global transformation and restructuring of the contents 
and  ﬁ elds of consciousness. Gurwitsch describes this situation in the following 
way: “It is one of the characteristic properties of the and-connection that when 
A 1 + A 2 is given, A 2 can undergo modi ﬁ cations which do not concern A 1 .” 29 
 It is because the content of the margins is utterly disconnected from and irrele-
vant for the theme that there really is no limit to the amount and kind of marginal 
data present with any given theme. 30  There are no restrictions, boundaries, or limits 
placed on the contents of marginal consciousness by the theme; thus, we can say in 
this respect that this is a domain of contingency as well. 31 The contents of marginal 
consciousness are contingent in the sense that any content may appear with any 
other content and does so. Right now my thematic awareness is copresent with the 
slight hunger that I have, my anticipation of the class that I will teach in the morn-
ing, the sound of a TV in another room of my residence, and the darkness outside. 
All of these facts are irrelevant not only for the theme but for each other as well. 
 26  Aron Gurwitsch,  The Field of Consciousness: Theme, Thematic Field, and Margin , Vol. III,  The 
Collected Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973) , Phaenomenologica 194, ed. Richard Zaner and 
Lester Embree (Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), 335–36; hereafter CWAG III. 
 27  Aron Gurwitsch,  Constitutive Phenomenology in Historical Perspective , Vol. I,  The Collected 
Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973), Phaenomenologica 192, ed. Jorge García-Gómez 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), Chapter 3, §9; hereafter, CWAG I. 
 28  See also CWAG III, 334. 
 29  Aron Gurwitsch, “Phenomenology of Thematics and of the Pure Ego: Studies of the Relation 
between Gestalt Theory and Phenomenology,”  Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology , Vol. II, 
 The Collected Works of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973), Phaenomenologica 193, ed. Fred Kersten 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), 298; hereafter, CWAG II. 
 30  CWAG III, 442. 
 31  CWAG III, 443. 
216
D. Marcelle
 It is important to point out, though, that while the content we are marginally 
aware of is irrelevant for the theme and contingent for other such contents, in no 
way can such be considered chaotic or disorganized. Rather, the contents of mar-
ginal awareness are richly organized and structured in themselves and their distinct 
contexts. Relevancy quite often describes the internal relationship of marginal con-
tents; they are not relevant for the theme, of course, but when they are themselves 
made a theme their structure and relevancy become apparent and the contents of 
consciousness are restructured. The natural surrounding world is an example of one 
such organized content of marginal awareness, but we could take simpler ones as 
well such as the objects surrounding the theme. Around the book that I am focused 
on now, there is a pencil, computer equipment, a lamp, a Satchel Paige playing card, 
a picture that my daughter drew, a phone bill, etc. Some of these things cohere with 
one another, such as the objects of the desk, but others are out of place such as the 
leash for my dog or engines for my son’s rocket; these things are, of course, inter-
nally relevant for their respective contexts. The important point is that although 
these marginal contents, which I have now made thematic, are quite often irrelevant 
for one another and essentially irrelevant for the theme, these objects are of them-
selves well-formed and distinct; if they are articulated, they are organized in terms 
of wholes and parts, and they are relevant for the world or milieu of which they are 
a part as well. We have to remember that all of the contents of marginal conscious-
ness have a potential to become thematic. We con ﬁ rm the facts of their organization 
when these marginal items become thematic objects of our attention. It is not the 
case that they suddenly become organized only when I make them thematic, they 
were so all along, it is just that I am now attentively aware of this, whereas I was 
previously only marginally aware of it. 
 Self-Awareness as Marginal 
 Possibly the most important feature of marginal consciousness is that apperception 
or self-awareness are always marginal contents that ultimately make explicit self-
awareness possible. As we are attentive to some theme or other, there is a kind of 
self-awareness that is necessarily and always marginally concomitant with thematic 
awareness that pervades all of conscious life. 32 Whatever kind of act of conscious-
ness we happen to be engaged in, we are at least marginally aware of being so 
engaged, that is, we are always marginally aware of our own awareness. The content 
of such self-awareness is marginal because it is neither thematic nor relevant for the 
 32  See CWAG III, 447–48, where Gurwitsch writes: “The self-awareness of an act of consciousness 
thus turns out to be a  necessary condition for the existence of this act. That every act of conscious-
ness carries self-awareness with it, so that this self-awareness accompanies us throughout all our 
conscious life, is more than a merely empirical fact, ascertained with utmost empirical generality; 
it is an a priori condition for consciousness. ” 
217
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
contents of straightforward thematic consciousness. Gurwitsch describes this in the 
following way: “In an exhaustive description of the theme, the inner awareness of 
the act through which the theme is given does not appear as an ingredient of that 
which is given. … From the point of view of the theme, the  self-awareness of an act is 
merely additional, a concomitant of the act .” 33 Thus, we can say that self-awareness 
is a necessary condition for the very existence of such acts and the possibility of 
re ﬂ ection, which would render such thematic. 34 It is important to keep in mind that 
the self-awareness that we are presently describing is not itself re ﬂ ection, but is the 
condition for the possibility of re ﬂ ection. Re ﬂ ection is de ﬁ ned as the thematization 
or objecti ﬁ cation of an act and its object, i.e., a noesis and its noema, by another 
special act that itself is accompanied with marginal self-awareness and may also be 
re ﬂ ected on by yet another higher order act, and so on; such thematization is the 
making thematic of a previously marginal content, which is a transformation of 
consciousness. 35 It is this making re ﬂ ection possible that is an absolutely important 
aspect of marginal self-awareness, which is clearly important for phenomenological 
work, but another important aspect concerns the experience of temporality. 
 The Streaming Character of Consciousness 
Constituted in the Margins 
 Marginal consciousness is absolutely important for consciousness in that it makes 
possible a kind of continuity of consciousness in a stream-like form. We are not 
simply conscious of the present moment without anticipations for the future or rem-
iniscence of the past. Mental life is not a series of disconnected activities and themes, 
but rather as a unity and continuity that is the result of temporal marginal awareness. 
We retain at least a marginal awareness of the duration of our mental activity and of 
having changed themes, the both of which constitute our temporally streaming con-
tinuity of consciousness. Marginal self-awareness of acts also includes the aware-
ness of the act’s essential temporality. As we are aware of something, thematically 
or marginally, we are also aware of that act’s duration as it develops as a unit passing 
through different phases. 36 Gurwitsch describes the awareness of temporality resulting 
from the marginal awareness that we have of the duration of our acts in the following 
 33  CWAG III, 446, emphasis added. 
 34  CWAG III, 448, where Gurwitsch writes: “Thus by its very existence, every act of consciousness 
ful ﬁ lls a condition of its possibly being grasped by an act of re ﬂ ection; in other words, owing 
merely to its existence, every act of consciousness is open to re ﬂ ective apprehension.” 
 35  See CWAG III, 449, for a discussion of self-awareness and re ﬂ ection. 
 36  CWAG III, 453. See CWAG III, 450–55, for a discussion of the temporal structure of conscious-
ness. See also CWAG III, 338, where he writes: “Every act of consciousness occurs in phenomenal 
time and thus is subject to the laws of phenomenal temporality, that is, it must necessarily exhibit 
the essential structure of phenomenal temporality.” 
218
D. Marcelle
way: “every act of consciousness is pervaded by some reminiscence or retention of 
at least those acts immediately preceding the present act and also by some expec-
tancy, however vague, that further acts will follow.” 37 The way in which marginal 
consciousness grants chronological order or phenomenal time to conscious life, 
then, is through the retention of past acts; the phenomenon of duration is a function 
of marginal consciousness. As conscious life  ﬂ ows, present acts of consciousness 
recede into the past, but are retained in memory. It is this memory that we are mar-
ginally aware of, but the future is also marginally present as a non-thematic aware-
ness of anticipations that we are presently experiencing but only marginally aware 
of. Simply put, we are marginally conscious that we have been attentive to the 
same theme for a duration and we also marginally anticipate continued duration. 38 
The continuity of context of the thematic  ﬁ eld is founded upon this more profound 
temporal continuity in the sense that such is a necessary condition for any act of 
consciousness and of its contents. 39 It is in this way that we are at least marginally 
aware of the ever-present  ﬂ ow of time that grants consciousness its streaming nature. 
 Also important for marginal temporal awareness is that beyond the present 
awareness and retention of the duration and succession of our mental activity there 
is also an awareness of the themes of these enduring and succeeding acts so that we 
are aware of presently changing themes or having changed themes altogether at 
some point in the past. It is in the marginal awareness of this succession of acts and 
themes in which the temporal order and structure of consciousness is constituted. 40 
In much the same way our sense of place is also constituted in the marginal contents 
of consciousness. 
 Marginal Awareness of the Surrounding World and Our Place 
 We are also always at least marginally aware of our surrounding environment and 
our place in it. Gurwitsch describes this: “the subject … is always in possession of 
an inarticulate, inde ﬁ nite, vague awareness of the fact that he  ﬁ nds himself in the 
surrounding world, and keeps a certain approximate and global orientation therein, 
at least so far as its generic style is concerned.” 41 As we attentively gaze upon some 
object in our perceptual environment or consider a non-perceptual theme such as 
some theory or another, we are also aware of the objects and space surrounding the 
 37  CWAG III, 337. 
 38  CWAG I, Chapter 3, §9. 
 39  CWAG III, 337–38. 
 40  CWAG III, 453–55. 
 41  CWAG I, Chapter 3, §9. CWAG III, 457, where Gurwitsch writes: “Whatever the theme of our 
mental activity, we cannot help being aware of a certain sector of the perceptual world, viz., our 
present perceptual environment, no matter how unconnected this sector may be, where relevancy 
is concerned, with that with which we are actually dealing.” 
219
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
object of attention. As you read this, copresent with your awareness of the pages, 
paper or electronic, presently dealing with my formulations concerning marginal 
consciousness, you are also aware of those things surrounding these pages such as 
walls,  ﬂ oors, ceiling, desk, lamps, windows, pens, music, noises outside the room, 
etc., which also happen to fall within the  ﬁ eld of your present perceptual awareness. 
 Our awareness of the environment extends into non-perceptual areas as well. In 
addition to those things that I just mentioned, you are also aware of the surroundings 
that exceed your present perceptual awareness. You have a certain awareness of how 
those things behind you would appear if you turned around, what is happening in 
the rooms outside of the one you presently occupy, the adjacent city streets, etc. 
Gurwitsch grants a certain privilege and priority to this non-perceptual cognizance 
for making us aware of the surrounding world; while perceptually marginal facts are 
thereby limited to the perceptual  ﬁ eld, non-perceptual awareness of our environ-
ment extends inde ﬁ nitely in all directions. The perceptual  ﬁ eld is only a small 
moment of this greater whole of one’s surrounding environment for which it is func-
tionally signi ﬁ cant and by which it is determined; the meaning and signi ﬁ cance of 
those things of which we are presently perceptually aware derives from non-perceptual 
things of which we may only be marginally aware at the time. It is in this way that 
we are aware of the natural world and also aware that it is continually present for 
us. 42 At the same time, it is the particular environmental experiences that inform 
the horizon of the perceptual world that is implicated. From my present position, 
I do not implicate the horizon of a rainforest or desert surrounding me, but rather my 
home and the streets of West Palm Beach, i.e., the horizon is determined as to its 
kind by present perceptual circumstances, which can be considered the “kernel” of 
the perceptual world. The type and style of this horizon, no matter how indetermi-
nate, are implied by the present perceptual content; this horizon should be consid-
ered a continuation of the present perceptual kernel. The horizon and kernel are in a 
kind of harmony and are relevant for one another. 43 This backs up our earlier asser-
tion that the contents of marginal consciousness are not a chaos, but are organized 
and structured, and even exhibit relevancy within horizons. From this kernel we 
may explicate the greater horizon through re ﬂ ection. 
 Marginal Awareness and the Body 
 In the great majority of what we have been describing, we have been considering the 
mental or psychic ego, but now we have to consider somatic aspects of the ego in 
terms of their necessary marginal presence in consciousness. No matter what theme 
it is that one is focused upon, accompanying the theme there is always in certain 
 42  CWAG II, 295. 
 43  CWAG III, 494. 
220
D. Marcelle
ways an awareness of one’s embodied existence or corporeity. Such awareness is 
not of a somatic ego or representation of the body that somehow accompanies our 
consciousness, but instead what we might call indications of a body. We will take 
this opportunity to say a few words about Gurwitsch’s descriptions of the body and 
embodiment and the important role that this ever-present marginal awareness of the 
body plays in the constitution of the lifeworld. While consciousness as a whole 
includes both psychic and somatic aspects and to consider either without the other 
can be a dangerous and problematic abstraction, we will see that the psychic or 
mental ego, for Gurwitsch, enjoys a certain priority over that of the somatic ego, 
which is important because it aids in understanding differences that he has from 
other writers on the body. Let us begin with marginal awareness of the body, which 
is our primary theme in this section and the inroad to the body for Gurwitsch. 
 While we entertain one theme or another, we are concomitantly always at least 
marginally aware of our bodily posture and general corporeal condition. 44 Such con-
sciousness is both proprioceptive in that we are aware of our motion, posture, and 
position, through sensory receptors within our muscles, tendons, joints, and inner 
ear, and exteroceptive in that we are aware of stimuli impacting our body from the 
outside. In the case of perception, if I take some perceptual object such as a building 
or tree, I am aware of this object as the theme of my attention, but I am also aware 
of the movement of my eyes as they scan over the object and my feet and legs as I 
walk around the object, and crouch or tip-toe to get different views. Similarly, I feel 
the exertion of my muscles and strain on my body when I lift something heavy and 
the wind on my face or the feel of stiff jeans on my legs as I walk. Even for intel-
lectual themes, we are at least marginally aware of our bodies; for instance, we may 
breathe quicker with the excitement of coming to understand the solution to a logi-
cal problem, the bodily distension of  ﬁ nishing the writing of an essay, or experience 
the  ﬂ ush of caffeine from the coffee we are drinking. Marginal bodily awareness, 
unless such is made thematic by re ﬂ ection, is not a content of whatever theme it is 
that we happen to be attending to, but is marginally concomitant. This is true even 
though the appearance of perceptual objects depend to a certain extent upon the 
position of our body and sense organs in relation to them; in terms of content, they 
are irrelevant for one another. 45 The primary point is that these somatic contents are 
at least marginally co-present with any theme whatsoever. 
 Another important point concerning marginal bodily awareness is that we are 
also at least marginally aware of our freedom of movement within certain limits, 
i.e., that we may move in certain ways and directions or not move at all. 46 Right now 
 44  CWAG III, 477–78. 
 45  “No feature, tinge, or aspect of the theme (the latter taken as it stands before our minds in a phase 
of the thematic process) derives from the actual bodily condition or is modi ﬁ ed by an alteration of 
this condition. This condition, although given all the time with more or less distinctness, is never-
theless experienced as being of no material concern or relevancy to them; it is  concomitant with but 
not  integrated into the thematic process,” “On Thematization,” ed. Lester Embree,  Research in 
Phenomenology 4 (1974): 29. 
 46  CWAG III, 477–78. 
221
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
I am at least marginally aware of the possibility that I may get up and walk out of 
the room through the door behind me, or continue sitting at the desk writing. 
 Regarding the status of the body, Gurwitsch recognizes the distinction between 
the “body” and the “organism,” that is, the body as it is experienced by a living 
subject from within, so to speak, and the body as an object in the world. 47 This is 
Husserl’s famous  Leib/Körper distinction, though Gurwitsch points out that we do 
not experience our body as some whole somatic ego that perpetually accompanies 
both thematic and marginal consciousness, but at the same time “no bodily experi-
ence appears as scattered facts.” 48 Instead of such a whole body, it is only the content 
of those bodily acts and processes of which we are at least marginally aware. 49 From 
these, though, others are implied and indicated. Gurwitsch describes this situation 
in terms of marginal consciousness:
 All of the experiences in question, both those of actual bodily facts and those of potentiali-
ties, point and refer to each other. … The experiences of bodily facts refer and point, fur-
thermore, beyond these facts to an inarticulate and confused horizon which, when 
apprehended and unfolded in the appropriate attitude, displays itself in a coherent and sys-
tematic group of bodily facts, both actual and virtual, the totality of the latter actually 
de ﬁ ning the bodily condition of the subject at the given moment. … The general awareness 
of our embodied existence or corporeity, which, as a marginal fact, accompanies us through-
out our conscious life, consists in the presence of this horizon, conveyed by particular 
bodily experiences. 50 
 Each bodily experience implies or is indicative of this horizon of other bodily 
experiences. In the same way that our present perceptual is a kernel or index of our 
greater surrounding sense of place, so too does the experience we have of parts of our 
body imply the body. 51 This points to the vague background of our bodies. In other 
words, we are referred to the order of bodily existence from any single experience. 
 Regarding the discussion of the body in general, beyond the marginal references 
to it above, Gurwitsch has very little to say about embodied existence. He only men-
tions the body in four places, only one of which was published in his lifetime. 52 
We get a feeling of Gurwitsch’s emphasis and prioritization of the psychic aspects 
of consciousness over that of the somatic in the following quote from one of his 
letters to Alfred Schutz: “And the whole displacement of consciousness to the 
body in Sartre and also in Merleau-Ponty seems to me to  turn things upside down . 
The correct question is of course: What does consciousness of my body look like?” 53 
 47  “The Phenomenological and Psychological Approach to Consciousness,” CWAG II, 110–11. 
 48  CWAG III, 483; he is making this point contra Max Scheler’s position that we have conscious-
ness of the body as a whole, which is prior to any somatic experience. 
 49  CWAG III, 484–85. 
 50  CWAG III, 482. 
 51  CWAG III, 482–83. 
 52  Gurwitsch does mention the body in the sections concerning marginal consciousness in his dis-
sertation (CWAG II). The other two places include “Marginal Consciousness,” CWAG III, and 
Gurwitsch-Schutz 1985. 
 53  Gurwitsch, Schutz 1985: 101. 
222
D. Marcelle
We can take this last question as a statement of the constitutive problem; like all 
other objects, the body is constituted through acts of consciousness noematically. 
Gurwitsch writes: “awareness of bodily processes and activities is also a matter of 
consciousness, no less and no more than cognizance or awareness of anything else. 
… that facts related to bodily activities and these activities themselves exist for us 
and may be subject matters of observation and reasoning is due to certain states of 
consciousness through which the facts and activities in question offer themselves.” 54 
But still, “The fact of our embodied existence is an ultimate and irreducible phe-
nomenal datum for our consciousness.” 55 In conjunction with the other necessary 
orders of marginal consciousness, somatic awareness has much to contribute to the 
constitution of the natural attitude. 
 The Role of Marginal Consciousness in the Constitution 
of the Natural Attitude 
 While the three permanent orders of existence or marginal consciousness are dis-
tinct and separated, i.e., coherent and closed, from one another and have thus far 
been considered individually, in our conscious lives and daily awareness there is an 
important correspondence among them or, as Gurwitsch says, an “intervention” of 
them upon one another, which makes possible the constitution of the natural attitude 
and its general thesis. 56 First, we will discuss the correspondence or intervention of 
the marginal orders of existence upon one another. And, second, we will discuss 
their role in the constitution of the natural attitude. 
 It is quite easy to come up with examples of how the perception of our surround-
ings and the awareness of our somatic existence intervene or correspond to one 
another. It is clear that perception provides the orientation by which our bodily 
movements are guided. We adjust our footing or change our direction based on our 
perception of the ground upon which we are walking; we step lightly when walking 
on ice, walk briskly on smooth pavement, and step carefully on roughly cobbled 
walkways. Another example is the way that we handle certain objects based on our 
perception of them. We handle objects that we perceive as fragile with careful move-
ments, and familiar objects with well-practiced movements. It is in this way that 
perceptual objects guide our bodily movements and provide spatial orientation for 
our movements. Gurwitsch writes: “Perception’s guidance of the movements con-
sists in the movements taking place on the grounds of and in accordance with what 
is offered by perception. … To be performed, the movements require and refer to 
points of orientation which can only be found in perception.” 57 In his  Marginal 
 54  CWAG, 474. 
 55  CWAG, 484. 
 56  CWAG III, 501–503. 
 57  CWAG III, 503. 
223
13 Ludwig Landgrebe  and the Signi ﬁ cance of Marginal Consciousness
Consciousness Gurwitsch only refers to the intervention of perception and the 
somatic ego, which are certainly good examples in the clarity of such intervention, 
but it would be easy to come up with examples of time intervening with the other 
two orders as well. Think of the batter in baseball who perceives the ball approach-
ing and must make bodily movements at the right time in order to hit the ball. Or 
there are the cases in which one has a limited amount of time to complete a task of 
some kind; in such cases the sense of streaming temporality intervenes on one’s 
bodily movements in order to quicken them. Musicians, especially those of rhyth-
mic instruments, mark the passing of time and must feel temporality informing their 
bodily movements. It is the awareness of temporality, in such cases, that informs the 
orientation of one’s bodily movements within a certain spatial environment. The 
embodied ego is in this way integrated into the world of perception and is one 
worldly existent among others. 58 It is through such interrelations, correspondences, 
and interventions that the natural attitude is constituted. An interesting example 
that Gurwitsch brings out is that of trial and practice, say of an athlete such as a 
gymnast or a drummer, who is training him or herself in terms of the intervention of 
the surrounding environment, temporality, and one’s bodily existence. 59 
 An important aspect of the intervention of marginal orders of existence is the 
way they implicate one another and, most importantly, the perceptual world. 
Gurwitsch points out that bodily postures do not happen “ in vacuuo ,” but rather 
provide us some information about the surrounding perceptual environment; 
“A suf ﬁ ciently complete analysis of kinesthetic experiences and the awareness of 
our bodily existence as conveyed by these experiences leads to the perceptual world 
as ground and basis of our embodied existence.” 60 It is through such intervention 
that we come to understand the body as a worldly or mundane object in the world 
like the other objects that we perceive, but as a peculiarly privileged and special 
object different from other objects as well. Gurwitsch points out that “we can have 
kinesthetic experiences of no object other than our body,” while all other objects 
may appear only externally. 61 In addition, whereas we may cease our perception of 
other objects, “we are immediately and directly aware of our body, at least in mar-
ginal form, at every moment of our lives, under all circumstances, and at whatever 
place we might happen to  ﬁ nd ourselves.” 62 It is in this omnipresence of these three 
special orders of existence that Gurwitsch describes as constituting the natural atti-
tude in the following way:
 This evidence consists in the permanent presence to consciousness, at least in marginal 
form, of the three orders of existence … Because at every moment of conscious life 
(whatever our special attitude and the subject matter of our thematic activity), we are aware 
of a certain segment of the stream of consciousness, of our embodied existence, and of the 
 58  CWAG III, 504. 
 59  CWAG III, 503. 
 60  CWAG III, 504. 
 61  CWAG III, 508. 
 62  CWAG III, 508. 
224
D. Marcelle
perceptual world, the belief in the existence of this world and the apprehension of ourselves 
as pertaining to it as mundane existents are permanently present to consciousness. Thus the 
facts treated here under the heading of “marginal consciousness” prove to be the root of 
what Husserl calls “the natural attitude.” 63 
 It is marginal consciousness that makes it possible to give up one theme in order 
to take up another willfully or not. Gurwitsch writes: “Marginal consciousness 
founds a further and essentially new possibility of relinquishing the actual theme 
and turning to a new one.” 64 It is in this way that the transformations of conscious-
ness are possible. 
 Concluding Remarks 
 Marginal consciousness plays a signi ﬁ cant role in the constitution of our natural 
attitude and the lifeworld. We have seen that marginal contents are not a disordered 
chaos and in are fact potential themes that may be taken up along with their con-
texts. Second, we have shown that along with any awareness that we may have there 
is also apperception of our act and ourselves supplied by marginal consciousness, 
which renders the possibility of re ﬂ ection. Third, we are now aware that the stream-
ing temporality of our consciousness is, in large part, supplied by marginal con-
sciousness of our protentions and retentions of the given present. In addition to 
time, our spatial and environmental awareness is to a large part constituted in the 
margins of our awareness. Fifth, we explored the manner in which embodiment is a 
marginal content. Finally, this essay was brought together more speci ﬁ cally how our 
natural attitude is in part constituted through the intervention of these marginal 
“orders of existence.” 
 63  CWAG III, 507–508. 
 64  CWAG II, 301. See also CWAG III, 499. 
225
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_14, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The  Ideen and Dorion Cairns 
 At the New School for Social Research during 1954–1968 Dorion Cairns (1901–1973) 
typically taught two courses a year of phenomenology and two seminars on texts by 
Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, or lecture courses on “Western Philosophy: 1840–1900,” 
“The Scottish School and Hamilton,” and “Modern Formal Logic.” In phenomenol-
ogy, “Husserl’s Theory of Intentionality” was twice taught in a course that lasted 
four semesters with some additional lectures and then that course was reworked into 
two semesters on intentionality and one semester each on “Phenomenology of 
Thinking,” “Theory of Knowledge,” “Theory of Value,” and “Advanced Theoretical 
Ethics,” which sequence was then taught repeatedly. Because he was teaching phe-
nomenology and not scholarship, Cairns practically never mentioned texts in his 
phenomenology lectures, but he did encourage students to begin their study with 
Part II, the “Phänomenologische Fundamentalbetrachtung,” of the  Ideen that Husserl 
had begun him on in 1924. 1 
 L.  Embree (*)
 Department of Philosophy, Florida Atlantic University ,  Boca Raton ,  FL ,  USA 
e-mail:  embree@fau.edu 
 Chapter 14 
 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, 
and the Field of Consciousness 
 Lester  Embree   
 1  “In 1924, after studying philosophy at Harvard for 5 years, I was awarded a traveling fellowship. 
During the academic year of 1923–1924, I had learned from Winthrop Bell enough about Husserl 
to persuade me to begin my foreign study in Freiburg. With letters from Bell and W. E. Hocking, 
I called on Husserl toward the beginning of the winter semester of 1924–1925. He put me to work 
at once, on the second volume of the  Logische Untersuchungen and on the “Phänomenologische 
Fundamentalbetrachtung” in the  Ideen . At the same time he told me, in effect: ‘We cast no magic 
spells here. Everything depends on you seeing for yourself the things we describe. It is up to you 
to follow our descriptions and either con ﬁ rm or correct them. Read slowly, pen in hand, and then 
bring me your dif ﬁ culties and objections.’” Dorion Cairns, “Nine Fragments on Psychological 
Phenomenology,” ed. Lester Embree, Fred Kersten, and Richard M. Zaner,  Journal of 
Phenomenological Psychology 41 (2010): 3. 
226
L. Embree
 In the fall of 1964 Cairns did, however, offer a seminar on Husserl’s  Ideen . 
That was the only time he taught a course about a phenomenological text. I regret 
not taking or sitting in on that course and do not remember why I did not. This is 
especially regrettable because notes on only four lectures survive in his Nachlass 
(027552–027575) and they are unusually sketchy. We do have audio tapes of the 
whole course, but these have yet to be converted into forms that can be listened to 
and transcribed, the technology having evolved. Some comments based on the notes 
on the four lectures must suf ﬁ ce here (the quotations below are from these incom-
plete sketchy lecture scripts). 
 The seminar was taught at the request of students who had already taken the two-
semester course on intentionality. It was not offered as an introduction to Husserl’s 
thought. The  ﬁ rst purpose of the course was to understand as clearly as possible 
what Husserl meant when he was writing the book in 1912 and this included not 
only the thoughts expressed by his words but also “the thoughts that were either 
thought  along with or  implied by the ones he  did express.” To accomplish this, 
relevant passages in the  ﬁ rst edition of the  Ideen needed to be collated with earlier 
and later texts. “By doing this we can, in fact, bring to light changes in some of his 
opinions and concepts and consequent changes in his terminology and emphases—
most of which are improvements.” The  ﬁ nal purpose was to criticize the thoughts. 
“First, an examination of the thoughts in question in order to see whether they are 
adequately or inadequately expressed, clear or obscure, distinct or confused. Then 
in cases where this is possible, we ought to confront the thoughts in question with 
the things they are about, in order to see whether the former are correct or incorrect, 
true or false.” 
 About the text to use, Cairns was concerned that it be the  ﬁ rst edition of the 
 Ideen , which could be established by using the appendices of the Biemel edition of 
1950 to identify later changes. By “the  Ideen ” he referred only to Book I because he 
had doubts about the authenticity of Book II. Otherwise, he said that “Boyce 
Gibson’s translation is misleading, obscure, or downright wrong in so many ways 
that it could be of little use by itself. But you might bring a copy to meetings if you 
can read neither German nor French—Ricoeur’s French translation, on the other 
hand, though sometimes free, is rarely downright wrong.” 
 Commenting on the title, Cairns said that “ Gedanken ” (“thoughts”) is another 
name for “ Ideen .” Ricoeur’s “ idées directrices ” (“guiding ideas”) is an interpreta-
tion, while “ideas pertaining to” is literal. Husserl thought the phenomenology in 
question was “pure”  ﬁ rst of all because it concerns phenomena that he thought of as 
transcendentally pure. “Such phenomena he contrasts with what he would call  reale 
Phänomene —by which he would designate just essentially possible individual phe-
nomena in an essentially possible spatio-temporal world. Transcendentally pure 
phenomena, on the other hand, are the same essentially possible individual phenom-
ena, but ‘puri ﬁ ed from that which confers upon them reality.’” The phenomena are 
also called “ Erlebnisse ,” which Cairns had come to prefer to translate as “mental 
processes,” “though ‘processes of mental life’ would be closer” (for his own work 
he preferred “intentive processes” and this occurs in his lecture scripts as well). 
227
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
 Cairns subsequently adds that “In the Introduction and in Book I, the phrases 
‘pure phenomenology,’ ‘transcendentally pure phenomenology,’ [and] ‘transcen-
dental phenomenology’ always designate a phenomenology that is not only  tran-
scendentally pure, transcendental, but also  eidetically pure , eidetical.” 
 Many of the surviving written notes are adversely critical. “The exposition [is] 
inevitably confusing before an analysis of the structure of the concrete noesis has 
been presented. This, however, is fully presented only in the course of later sections: 
§§92, 99, 104, 105, and, in Part IV, §§129–133—notably: §131. The ‘object’ as 
determinable X in the noematic sense < of the intentive process > .”—“Furthermore, 
[the]  Ideen does not point out that there are as many intentional objects of an inten-
tive process as there are ‘determinable X’s’—in particular, that each moment of an 
object-sense is itself a determinable X.” 
 “Other faults in [the]  Ideen ’s exposition are [that the a]nalysis is worked out 
expressly only for  actional intendings [and] only for separate intendings, not for 
syntheses of intendings—actual and potential (horizonal). This has led some to 
interpret the noema erroneously as an appearance of the intended thing.” 2 
 The surviving notes focus  ﬁ nally on time. “‘Phenomenological’ Time [is] the uni-
tary form of all  Erlebnisse in one  Erlebnisstrom . [This is r]egardless of whether the 
 Erlebnisse  are taken as occurring in the spatio-temporal world or as transcendental. … 
‘Objective time—cosmic time.’ [“ Raumzeit ” is written on the margin.] It is in fact one 
non-self-suf ﬁ cient dimension of an integral form, as  space-time . But this fact, so far 
as I know, [was] not seen by Husserl. [It is s]uggested by twentieth Century physics, 
but the case [is] not just of the twentieth Century physicists’ world. This becomes 
plain only through an analysis of world constitution. Such an analysis makes it plain 
also that there are many space-times. Husserl saw at least that there are many spaces, 
but so far as I know, [he] did not draw the consequence that there are many transcen-
dent times, as many as there are levels of noetic-noematic constitution.” 
 Cairns’s revision of Husserl’s  hylē-morphē doctrine is mentioned, but was better 
expressed six years later. 3 His alternative view distinguishes sensings and transcen-
dent sensa. Then he could assert that, “Fundamentally important … is the failure of 
Husserl to distinguish the times of sensa  ﬁ elds from the pure time of mental life. 
[This is f]undamentally important because [the] self-apperception of mental life as 
in the same space-time with all sensa is [the]  ﬁ rst and most important step in ‘self-
mundanization.’ In [the]  Ideen  …  all  the intermediate steps in automatic self-
mundanization of a mental life [are] ignored.” 
 2  Cairns may be alluding here to Aron Gurwitsch, whose work,  The Field of Consciousness, he had 
recently refereed for Harvard University Press and whom he said on other occasions tended to reify 
the noema. After all, who else was writing extensively about the noema in that time?. 
 3  Dorion Cairns, “The Many Senses and Denotations of the Word  Bewusstsein (‘Consciousness’) 
in Edmund Husserl’s Writings,”  Life-World and Consciousness, Essays in Memory of Aron 
Gurwitsch , ed. Lester E. Embree (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1972), 19–31. See 
also my “Objects Inside and Outside the Body According to Dorion Cairns,”  Thinking in Dialogue 
with the Humanities: Paths into the Phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty , ed. Karel Novotný, Taylor S. 
Hammer, Anne Gléonec, and Petr Špecián (Bucharest: Zeta Books, 2010), 13–30. 
228
L. Embree
 Elsewhere in his Nachlass Cairns has much to say about founded noetico-noematic 
strata, i.e., between the doxic and the non-doxic or the emotional-valuational and 
the conative-volitive. He also asserted that he could not verify some aspects Husserl’s 
descriptions of non-doxic syntactical acts, e.g., collective liking and collective will-
ing. Moreover, he was unable to verify the alleged one-to-one correlation of moments 
in the noesis and in the noema. 4 
 In sum, Dorion Cairns took Husserl’s  Ideen very seriously, but was somewhat 
ambivalent about it. 
 Types in the Field of Consciousness 
 Introduction 
 In §22 of his  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, I. Buch  (1913), Edmund Husserl writes: “The truth is that all human 
beings see ‘ideas,’ ‘essences,’ and see them, so to speak, continuously; they operate 
with them in their thinking, they also make eidetic judgments—except that from their 
epistemological standpoints they interpret them away.” 5 Nothing will be said here 
about interpreting things away. Rather, I shall consider how material universal essences 
can indeed be said to be seen continuously. Referring to the analysis of the  ﬁ eld of 
consciousness of Aron Gurwitsch (1901–1973), my contention is that when such uni-
versals are not thematic or relevant, they are marginal. And, to begin with, it will help 
this thesis if we follow Dorion Cairns (1901–1973) on how what are called “empirical 
types” in Husserl’s  Erfahrung und Urteil  (1939) are understood as unclari ﬁ ed mate-
rial universals, which goes beyond the account of the eidetic in the  Ideen.  
 Types 
 Cairns always taught that eideation and universal essences were as important for 
Husserl in the  Ideen as the transcendental phenomenological epochē, reduction, and 
puri ﬁ cation, but came to be of secondary importance for him by the time of the 
 Cartesianische Meditationen (1931), were they were dealt with in the IV.  Meditation , 
which is in effect a set of appendices (and the V.  Meditation is in effect a separate 
 4  Cairns also based his critique and alternative on Husserl’s  Ideen I . See Lester Embree, “Wisdom 
more than Knowledge and more than Loved: Dorion Cairns’s Revision of Husserl’s Philosophic 
Ideal,”  Journal of British Society of Phenomenology 41/2 (2010). 
 5  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book , 
trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983), 41. 
229
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
treatise). Nevertheless, Cairns once lectured at length about universal essences, 
emphasizing the account in Part I of the  Ideen , but going on to include some later 
thought:
 In  Erfahrung und Urteil , Husserl distinguishes between empirical type and essence; an 
empirical type is a kind of pure essence as in the  Ideen . The word  type , meaning a generic 
or speci ﬁ c type, is used interchangeably with essence or  reine Wesen  up to the  Ideen . 
In  Erfahrung und Urteil , a distinction is made, namely, the distinction between  reine Wesen 
and  Typus . What is pre-constituted passively or constituted automatically, prior to any activ-
ity on the part of an ego, is the empirical type—it is a universal, but it subsumes under itself 
already  just those  variants of the universal that have happened to come along empirically in 
the life in question. 6 
 Thus if all the books one had ever seen had blue covers, one could be expected 
to assert that “All books are blue.” This is why types are said to be “empirical.” 
Eidetic epochē, free-phantasy variation, and eidetic evidencing would transcend 
this to clarify what had been obscure and make it possible to say that “All books are 
colored.” Prior to the practice of eidetic method, however, there is always at least 
vague awareness of material universals. 
 The Formal and Conceptual Excluded 
 Cairns’s account is especially interesting because it distinguishes material from formal 
universal essences and pursues the pre-constitution of the former. While the struc-
ture of the evidencing and thus eidetic cognition of universals of both species are the 
same, he writes:
 The  eidē have, however, their pre-constitution; they are pre-constituted before an ego 
singles them out, objectivates them, and makes them objects for himself. The pre-constitut-
ing of an  eidos turns out to be, in the case of a material essence, different from what it is in 
the case of a formal essence. We may say that the material  eidē are pre-constituted by  pri-
marily automatic intendings, whereas the formal ones are pre-constituted by acts, or actional 
intendings—notably by those that may be subsumed under the heading “thinking,” but also 
by mental acts which are of such a  primitive sort that they can hardly be called “thinking,” 
but such actively paying attention to something gives it a  form (in a logical sense). Upon 
conferring this something-form upon a plurality of things, there is [also] pre-constituted 
the  eidos “something” which is exempli ﬁ ed in each of the particular something-forms. The 
pre-constituting of the formal  eidos “something” is an automatic affair as the basis for 
the active picking-out of this “thing,” “this” … 
 The more fundamental  eidē  are the material ones. Redness, coloredness, texture, 
smoothness, etc. are not universals like whole, part, subject, predicate, collection, etc. 
Those universals (e.g., redness, which is exempli ﬁ ed in each of the red things by its indi-
vidual redness) are there ready for an ego to apprehend them, to pick them out—no action 
creates them; they are created, however, automatically; we have to go down to automatic 
synthesis to uncover the manner in which they are ready to be picked out and be clari ﬁ ed 
by an ego.   
 6  Most of Cairns’s lecture is in the appendix of this chapter and quotations are from there. 
230
L. Embree
 My other teacher, Aron Gurwitsch, had grave doubts about the  Abbau-Aufbau 
method so important for Cairns and Husserl. Nevertheless, he does describe the 
constitution of what needs to be abstracted from in order to reach the level where 
material universals can most readily be seen. In his contribution to the Cairns 
Festschrift, “Perceptual Coherence as the Foundation of the Judgment of 
Predication,” 7 which he considered a reworking of what was central to  Erfahrung 
und Urteil , Gurwitsch describes “articulating thematization” as follows:
 Articulating thematization proves to be a special mental operation performed on a given 
perceptual situation, which thereby undergoes categorial formation. To that speci ﬁ c opera-
tion corresponds a speci ﬁ c noematic correlate, namely, the  state of affairs (Sachverhalt) 
which is  the judgmental noema, founded on but different from, the perceptual noema. 
Husserl has formulated the difference as that between … “what is judged”  (das Geurteilte), 
and that on which the judgment bears or to which it refers  (das Beurteilte). The latter 
denotes the thing perceived, the former the state of affairs which results from and is consti-
tuted by the categorial formation of the thing perceived by means of articulating thematization 
(Idem, 262). 
 What Gurwitsch is referring to here are, however, not material universal essences. 
This is clear in two respects. On the one hand, categorical form is precisely not the 
content or matter that is abstracted from in formalization, but is rather what is focused 
on in obtaining a particular form from a verbal expression such as “this table is 
brown” and, on the other hand, that particular form is not eidetic but categorial or 
conceptual. To be sure, we do indeed proceed in logic from the categorial forms of 
particular judgments to the universal essences that they exemplify, but what we reach 
then are formal universals, e.g., “ S is  p ,” and not material universals such as tableness 
and brownness. (It may well be a source of confusion that as students we often early 
learn in studying logic to formalize and eideate practically simultaneously.) 
 Let me confess at this point that for the longest time I did not distinguish between 
concepts and universal essences. Then one day it dawned on me that while both con-
cepts and essences can be referred to, only concepts can be conveyed or expressed by 
words. Essences, individual as well as universal, cannot themselves be expressed ver-
bally, but can be referred to. Concepts refer, universal essences do not. Thus the con-
cept expressed by the word “bookness” refers to or is about—but is different from—the 
universal material essence that particular books can be seen to exemplify. 8  
 If we abstract from how objects are conceptually formed, we reach prepredica-
tive perception, which is what Gurwitsch is chie ﬂ y interested in and where, of 
course, he draws on Gestalt Psychology in order to object to Husserl’s doctrine of 
hyletic data and to offer what I have called a “Gestalt phenomenological” alterna-
tive instead. 
 7  Reprinted as Chapter 10 of Aron Gurwitsch,  Phenomenology and the Theory of Science , ed. 
Lester Embree (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1974). 
 8  It seems that even Husserl recognized that he sometimes confused universals and concepts, for the 
following is translated from his marginal note on Copy A beside the passage from  Ideen I, §22 
quoted at the beginning of the present essay: “False. Idea and essence are identi ﬁ ed here, and 
signi ﬁ cation taken as essence.” 
231
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
 The Structure of the Field of Consciousness 
 What Gurwitsch nowhere asks about is whether and how we might be aware of 
material essences continuously. As intimated, however, he might have, because he 
had the resources to do so in his  ﬁ eld theory. He offers this description of the  ﬁ eld 
of consciousness in his last paper:
 Thematization may be understood in a very broad sense to denote any change or modi ﬁ cation of 
thematic consciousness. Sitting at our desk, we are perceptually occupied with a book or—as it is 
usually put—we devote our attention to the book, while at the same time we perceive a sheet of 
paper also lying on the desk and pertaining to the perceptual surroundings or—as I have called 
it—the thematic  ﬁ eld of the book, which is our actual theme. We are free to change the direction 
of our perceptual attention so as to devote it to the sheet of paper. What previously had been a 
“potential” theme, that is to say a segregated unit within the thematic  ﬁ eld and, hence, a compo-
nent of the latter, now becomes a theme in its own right, while the previous theme, the book, is 
inactualized and relegated to the status of a component of the thematic  ﬁ eld. The situation is 
substantially the same when, being engrossed in a mathematical demonstration and having 
reached a certain step, we “look back” at a mathematical theorem which leads to the present step. 
In both cases, we shift from one theme to another. Still, we are moving within the same thematic 
 ﬁ eld, its reorganization and reorientation notwithstanding. The situation is slightly different in the 
following case. Suppose that, while dealing the mathematical theorem, we hear a noise which on 
account of its irrelevancy to the theorem does not belong to the thematic  ﬁ eld but—as I have 
proposed to call it—the margin. We may turn our attention to that noise either of our own free 
choice or because it has become so intrusive as to divert us from the mathematical demonstration. 
In contradistinction to the previously mentioned examples in which it meant freely wandering, so 
to speak, within the same thematic  ﬁ eld or, at least, the same thematic context, thematization here 
purports relinquishing not only the theme but also the thematic  ﬁ eld. 9  
 There are thus three zones, one might say, in the  ﬁ eld of consciousness. To be 
seen constantly, material universals need always to be found in at least one of them. 
Before I attempt to show this, one more passage deserves quotation to show how 
Gurwitsch agrees with Cairns and Husserl concerning empirical types, something 
that will be useful presently. 
 Gurwitsch writes the following about what we always begin from in the life-
world prepredicatively:
 On this level, we do not encounter things and persons presenting themselves in their full 
individuality. With the exception of persons and also things which have for us the sense of 
uniqueness, as, e.g., my father, my apartment, and the like, we rather encounter beings of a 
kind or sort: another woman, another child, another policeman, another tree, another car, 
and so on. What is encountered appears in the light of a certain typicality. (Idem, 43) 
 Three Descriptions 
 With these points from Gurwitsch and Cairns as preparation, some phenomenology 
can now be undertaken regarding the three ways in which a book and a sheet of 
 9  Aron Gurwitsch, “On Thematization,” ed. Lester Embree,  Research in Phenomenology 4 (1974): 
35, hereafter cited as “Thematization.” 
232
L. Embree
paper on a desk in the library might be encountered. It is for the hearer or reader of 
the following descriptions to decide for herself on the basis of re ﬂ ective observation 
if these descriptions are true or not.
 1.  Experiencing material universal essences. Even though everybody already 
thinks they know what one is, it not unphilosophical to ask, “What is a book?” and 
go into a fairly extensive investigation of bookness. It helps to refrain from focus-
ing on the unique individual book on the desk as actually existing and instead to 
consider it as merely another example on a par with various feigned books. Then 
other things of the same sort can be reviewed and one might suppose that the book 
is something that can be read, that it is a species under the genus Reading Material 
or somesuch. One might then see that it must be artifactual, which is to say some-
thing produced through human action. The tracks that a hunter follows are cer-
tainly natural things that represent her prey, but it is metaphorical to speak of 
“reading” in this connection. What is read, strictly speaking, has been humanly 
structured so that concepts are conveyed by perceivable marks. 
 With modern technology, there can be audio recordings in which concepts are 
conveyed by sounds, and hence “audio books” are a species and then there are 
books for the blind that can be read through touching patterns of raised dots with 
the  ﬁ ngers and thus are another species, but let us con ﬁ ne ourselves to the species 
of books relying on visible marks to convey concepts. Sets of pictures—or samples 
of wallpaper—that have been bound together may resemble the familiar artifacts 
called books, but if they do not convey concepts, they are not literally books qua 
things to read. Books of matches are also not in the species being clari ﬁ ed. 
 Most books for reading today are composed of multiple pages bound on one 
edge and this seems to distinguish them from piles of sheets with writing on 
them, but this binding on the edge is at best characteristic of a modern subspe-
cies of book and not of the genus, for the rolls of papyrus used in ancient 
Greece and Rome are certainly books, as are Asian scrolls, and now there are 
e-readers, such as the Kindle. Today there are also books that can be read on 
computer screens where the pages follow one another fairly continuously. 
What is necessary is a spatial area (or areas) displaying visible marks that con-
vey concepts. 
 Length is another consideration, for a pamphlet or indeed a “book” of postage 
stamps or a telephone directory is not a book of the sort focused on in this analysis. 
Perhaps a book is something to read that usually takes more than one sitting. 
Then again one might wonder if a book must have multiple copies, but since the 
last copy in existence or the  ﬁ rst copy printed are still books, that is not essential. 
There are subspecies of books, some with one or more author writing together 
throughout and some with separate authors for different chapters. And even further, 
there is the matter of content that makes a book  ﬁ ne literature or trash, fact or 
 ﬁ ction, poetry or prose, and so on. No doubt this inquiry about what a book is can 
continue further, but already what has been said occurs on the eidetic level and 
exempli ﬁ es generalization and speci ﬁ cation and throughout one somehow always 
already has an awareness of what is to be clari ﬁ ed. 
233
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
 While it can help  ﬁ x the signi ﬁ cations of words, such descriptive work is 
fundamentally about what is being referred to, which is to say that it is a matter 
of getting clearer about some of the material universals that particular factual or 
 ﬁ ctive books do or can exemplify. Such an operation involves shifting back and 
forth between subordinate, superordinate, and coordinate species in genera. 
 Nothing new has been said here, it is all almost too familiar to any intellectual, 
but in Gurwitschean terms, there is shifting between what is thematic and what is 
relevant within a  ﬁ eld composed of material universals. It is all about seeing 
material universals. But it can also be said that prior to this process of clari ﬁ cation 
empirical types, as they are called in  Erfahrung und Urteil , are always already 
there and being brought from the margin into the thematic  ﬁ eld. The way that, in 
Plato, one can recollect forms that one saw before birth and then forgot, seems 
convergent with this.  
 2.  Experiencing unique individuals.  Then again, as Gurwitsch maintains in one of 
the passages quoted, one can focus on or thematize in its full individuality the 
unique book on the table that one is studying and the unique sheet of paper on 
which one is taking notes and have that sheet relevant to the book. Alternatively, 
the unique individual sheet of paper on which one is taking notes can be one’s 
theme and the book studied can be relevant to it. What was thematic and what 
was relevant to it then exchange places. (One might consider this case problem-
atical because reading and writing involve concepts, but the concepts involved 
can be abstracted from.) Here no universal essences are immediately involved in 
the thematic  ﬁ eld. Factual assertions are appropriate, e.g., “This book is blue.” 
Nevertheless, bookness and paperness can be found in the margin. This is again 
a situation in which the universal essences are vague and thus types but neverthe-
less constantly there as objects of awareness, i.e., marginal awareness. This is 
analogous in a reverse way to how a mathematician pondering theorems while 
walking down the street is not unaware of the street, other pedestrians, etc. 
 I  ﬁ nd this species of experiencing of unique individuals to require a special 
attitude that is actually not easy to maintain until it becomes a habitual skill, but 
it might be fundamental for a great deal of modern philosophy and psychology, 
i.e., empiricism, with the original derivation from lifeworldly encountering 
overlooked. 
 3.  Experiencing Things in the Light of Types.  Gurwitsch refers, e.g., to “another 
woman, another child, another policeman, another tree, another car.” Thus when 
I walk through the library what I encounter in passing “another desk” can be 
“another book,” “another sheet of paper,” and indeed “another person” not as 
unique individual things, but in their typicality. They present themselves as 
things of certain sorts or kinds preconstituted in primary passivity. These sorts 
or kinds are somewhat obscure, they are types, but the desks, books, sheets, and 
persons are also somewhat obscure and these objects as well as the types make 
up thematic  ﬁ elds from which one can go on to clarify the universal essences 
that particulars exemplify or to thematize the unique individuals with types left 
on the margin.     
234
L. Embree
 In sum, material universal essences are among the things of which there is always 
marginal if not relevant or thematic awareness. But a terminological question 
remains. Should the vague awareness of at least types when they are not thematic or 
relevant but in the margin be considered “seeing”? Such material universals can 
certainly be clari ﬁ ed and then evidenced eidetically, i.e., seen in a fairly strict 
signi ﬁ cation, but usually they are not. If one wishes to recast Husserl’s statement to 
read, “The truth is that all human beings are at least vaguely aware of ‘essences,’ 
and are vaguely aware of them continuously,” I would not object. 
 Appendix 
 Eideation is discussed in a series of extra lectures on “Problems of Transcendental 
Phenomenology” that Dorion Cairns delivered at the New School for Social 
Research in Spring Semester 1966. Two pertinent passages are transcribed below 
from the notes of Professor Jorge García-Gomez. Professor Richard M. Zaner, 
Cairns’s literary executor, as well as Professor García-Gomez, are thanked for per-
mission to publish from this transcription. 
 The intuiting of essences and eidetic cognition are now our concern here. 
The classic use of the word “essence” and the account of these topics is in Husserl’s 
 Ideen I , Bk I, Pt. I. There he is concerned with the  active intuiting of essences, and, 
since such active intuitions are the same in structure whether the essence is a material 
essence or a formal essence they are treated together. The  eidē have, however, their 
pre-constitution; they are pre-constituted before an ego singles them out, objectivates 
them, and makes them objects for himself. The pre-constituting of an  eidos turns 
out to be, in the case of a material essence, different from what it is in the case of a 
formal essence. We may say that the material  eidē are pre-constituted by  primarily 
automatic intendings, whereas the formal ones are pre-constituted by acts, or 
actional intendings—notably by those that may be subsumed under the heading 
“thinking,” but also by mental acts which are of such a  primitive sort that they can 
hardly be called “thinking,” but such actively paying attention to something gives it 
a  form (in a logical sense). Upon conferring this something-form upon a plurality of 
things, there is pre-constituted the  eidos “something” which is exempli ﬁ ed in 
each of the particular something-forms. The pre-constituting of the formal  eidos 
“something” is an automatic affair as the basis for the active picking-out of this 
“thing,” “this”… 
 The more fundamental  eidē are the material ones. Redness, coloredness, texture, 
smoothness, etc. are not universals like whole, part, subject, predicate, collection, 
etc. Those universals (e.g., redness, which is exempli ﬁ ed in each of the red things 
by its individual redness) are there ready for an ego to apprehend them, to pick them 
out—no action creates them; they are created, however, automatically; we have to 
go on to automatic synthesis to uncover the manner in which they are ready to be 
picked out and be clari ﬁ ed by an ego. 
235
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
 Most of Husserl’s published work has had to do with active clari ﬁ cation and 
constitution and the method of free variation (which  requires an ego to be engaged) 
but has little to say about the automatic (except for something in  Erfahrung und 
Urteil) . His motives for the preference are twofold: (1) the active processes are 
easier to observe and describe; (2) Husserl carried on his analysis of the complexity 
of the mental life along those lines in the whole which were necessary to clarify the 
nature of phenomenologizing which is a doxic theoretical activity, and so the doxic 
theoretical is described there fundamentally and in more detail than the non-doxical. 
The activity of the phenomenologist is a doxic theoretical activity as Husserl 
conceives it, especially at the time of the  Ideen (whose aim is  eidetic ), since he 
seeks to establish the fundamental discipline (Phenomenology), which is  eidetic , 
and clarify the fundamentally possible and impossible modes of intentiveness to things 
(e.g., the essential nature of sense-perception, judging, i.e., the universal exempli ﬁ ed 
by any possible sense-perception, judging, etc.) Because this is the case, the nature 
of the grasping of essences is something which Husserl thinks must be clari ﬁ ed to 
make his method explicit and clearer—it will clarify Phenomenology for himself. 
This diminishes his treatment of the automatic pre-constituting of the material and 
formal  eidē in his published works. 
 Since  material eidē in their pre-constitution involve  no action of an ego while 
formal  eidē  in their pre-constitution involve action, and since in general the actional 
strata of the mental life presuppose the automatic strata, the systematic treatment is 
to expound the pre-constitution of the material  eidē before that of formal  eidē . We 
ought to examine how  speci ﬁ c  redness is constituted before the manner in which 
wholes and parts are there ready to be objectivated by an ego. This involves, if prop-
erly undertaken, a systematic procedure which Husserl called  Abbau , un-building; 
in particular, it involves an abstracting from all those strata of the mental life that are 
either actional intendings or that have as their objects things the constituting of which 
presuppose actional intendings; by such an abstraction, one uncovers an  abstract 
stratum of one’s mental life which is purely automatic having as its objects only 
those things pre-constituted purely automatically; one abstracts from active thinking, 
judging, etc. and their results, from all the conceptual form that the  world has for this 
mental life by virtue of active thinking; one abstracts also from all actional valuing 
and striving; what is  left , ultimately, is a sub-stratum of this mental life including 
substrata. Material universals are of diverse sorts, and, as one proceeds with this 
unbuilding from higher to lower strata of automaticity, one would get to the lowest 
stratum of all, which is an intending  simply  to   ﬁ elds  of sensa (visual, auditory, kines-
thetic, etc.) in which, to be sure, one  can actively  pick out individual sensa, but one 
refrains from such active picking out but concentrates on what makes them speci ﬁ cally 
different and on the  genera  exempli ﬁ ed by these species. We  ﬁ nd that the phenome-
non of automatic transfer is fundamental to the preconstitution of material universals 
at this level and thus to their constitution at all levels. 
 The question about the existence and status of universals and their relations to 
individuals is as old as Platonic philosophy. The question has been traditionally  
likewise such a straightforward, ontological treatment with arguments for the 
236
L. Embree
existence ( not  the reality) of universal  essences  and concepts, but one also has a 
phenomenological treatment; were it not for the latter, the ontological arguments 
and analysis of the relation of the universal to the individual would be merely a 
continuation of the tradition. 
 What do I mean by a phenomenological treatment? In such a treatment in general 
the things inquired about are not taken by the phenomenologist as existents or non-
existents but as objects of intendings. The inquiry is one into the  nature of the 
intendings, the intentive synthesis in particular, of which the things in question are 
objects of. This is true both of realities and idealities. The procedure is: (1) what is 
the objective sense of “these things” for the mental life; (2) are there any intendings 
in which a thing of the sort in question is itself  given ,  presented , intuited? The con-
tention for the existence of  ideal things , in particular ideal essences or  eidē , becomes 
transformed into the contention that there are modes of intending in which, descrip-
tively speaking, these things are given in person or intuited and, as intuited or expe-
rienced (generally understood); they are on a par with men, chairs, tables, stars, etc. 
(all of which for the phenomenologist are given in person,  originaliter : to this extent 
that they are given, they—the universals—are in ontic coordination with other 
things; the test of a thing is that it be given in the harmony of an identifying synthe-
sis and universals meet this test). These are  data , and Ockham’s razor was not meant 
to cut data out, but only hypothetical entities. 
 The phenomenological inquiry into  universals was begun historically by Husserl 
as an inquiry into what he later called  formal universals , formal  eidē , or pure formal 
essences, along with universal concepts (which at that time he did not discriminate). 
In his  Philosophie der Arithmetik , he was to clarify the concepts of number; there 
we have an inquiry into the forms exempli ﬁ ed by collections of elements and the 
forms 2, 3, 4 … (as exempli ﬁ ed in any pair, trio, quartet, etc. of things of any kind 
and the formal  eidē that are pre-supposed by these collection-forms); but these 
forms are  analogous  to other forms that have long been considered (since Aristotle) 
the forms of the propositions (historically, of predicative propositions). There has 
been a failure to distinguish between a proposition made up of concepts and a sen-
tence made up of words; the former, if it exists, is an  ideal affair. We have to make 
a threefold distinction: (1) the proposition as a conceptual whole; (2) the state of 
affairs or the  fact (as contrasted with the proposition); (3) the predicatively formed 
affair complex or fact which is the analog of a set of  ﬁ ve things: “Socrates being 
mortal” is not the proposition “Socrates is mortal.” Each one of these categorially 
formed objects has a form which is part of it. The fact has its particular form which 
exempli ﬁ es a universal form; the same is true of a proposition: “today is Friday,” 
“Johnson is President,” etc. All have  one form which is  its form as a part of it, but 
 each of these forms exempli ﬁ es the formal  eidē which is symbolizable by “S is p,” 
and the same is true of the corresponding “facts”: three angels, three propositions—
each of these sets has  its  threeness, but they exemplify the formal universal “three” 
(whose concept also exempli ﬁ es a universal). 
 It was Husserl’s contention that on the basis of comparing a number, say, of 
propositions with different  conceptual stuff in them (as in the examples above), 
I can  ﬁ nd something  identical (not  sensu stricto are they identical); this can be 
237
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
discriminated not only from the concrete collection or proposition but also from the 
 form which is a part of the particular collection or proposition. These were the  ﬁ rst 
universals Husserl dealt with, but something similar is the case with non-formal 
universals: if I take a red rose, and a red billiard ball—two objects of sensuous per-
ceiving; each of these things is given as having its own redness which is a  part of 
the thing in question—these forms are spatio-temporally individuated  colors . But 
we say of the rose and the ball that they are similar with respect of color (at the ideal 
limit, they are exactly the same color). This is not the same as saying that there is 
one red as a  real part of both things. It is to say that redness is exempli ﬁ ed in each 
of these concrete, individual things in its individual redness. There is a universal 
redness exempli ﬁ ed here now and there now. The phenomenological (not ontologi-
cal) contention is that there is a mental process characterized as a presentation of 
universal redness just as there is one characterized as a presentive awareness of the 
individual redness; both presentive awarenesses are different intentive processes, 
each having a peculiar object, one being generic, the other individual. These, of 
course, are actional intendings characterized as intuitive, as presentive. 
 Here, however, the difference roughly ends, because the structure of the presentive 
intending to an individual and that of the presentive intending to an  eidos —be it 
formal or material—are different. The intending to the universal is founded on the 
intending to a particular example and, more speci ﬁ cally, an intuiting of the  eidos 
must be founded on an intuiting of a particular. To intuit a generic essence or  eidos 
I must intuit a particular, which does not mean that I must always for this purpose 
remember or perceive a particular redness; it is enough that it be a (clear)  quasi -
remembering or perceiving. An animal sees red without seeing it as a species of 
color or crimson as a species of red. Once we have got to the point at which we have 
a word “red” as distinct from “yellow” and “orange,” there is an awareness of the 
universal, so that when we see a new individual, we include it in a “kind” which is, 
according to Husserl, a consequence of having  once upon a time intuited the generic 
and the individual form. When I see a particular color as a particular color, it is 
because once I had “perceived” color in general as well as  this color, but it is pos-
sible for a mental life to go on without an  active grasping of universals (which is 
probably the case of animals). It is not necessary to see the universal to see the par-
ticular, but it is necessary to see the particular to see the universal, and once the 
latter has been done, I see the particular as an example of the universal (as a conse-
quence of my history). The formal universals  presuppose some kind of mental 
action (collecting, judging, etc.). Do the material objects presuppose it? No, but this 
is our topic now. 
 Conclusion 
 The texts devoted to  eidē in Husserl’s works are  Ideen I , Book I, Part I and  Erfahrung 
und Urteil , Part III, a most important supplementation in which Husserl deals with the 
pre-constitution of the material  eidos . This text,  Erfahrung und Urteil , is  stylistically 
238
L. Embree
the product of the editor, Dr. Landgrebe, and it seems to me that the whole thought 
is  ﬁ ltered through the editor’s mind and occasionally does not express Husserl’s 
mind. So this text should be used, yes, but with  caution . Concerning  Ideen I , Pt. I: 
it was written and published at a time in which the two aspects of phenomenology 
had for him  equal importance; phenomenology was to be, on the one hand, tran-
scendental and, on the other hand, eidetic. These two features loomed in his mind 
with equal importance. Part I of the  Ideen has as its purpose the vindication of the 
eidetic sciences, whether it be developed in the natural or in the transcendental-
phenomenological attitude. He wanted to show that it is a possible science, with its 
own subject-matter over and against the sciences of matters of fact. From this fol-
lows, in particular, the justi ﬁ cation of an eidetic science on the transcendental level; 
but this is not his concern here. Eidetic cognition is a term which includes not only 
knowings whose objects are  essences but also those whose objects are essential pos-
sibilities, impossibilities, necessities. In geometry and the traditional eidetic sci-
ences we do not speak of  de facto triangles, lines, etc., but of evidently possible 
lines, triangles, etc.; that is, the essentially possible exempli ﬁ cations of the  essences 
(which are not the objects of those eidetic sciences). 
 In the  ﬁ rst part of Book I, Husserl is concerned with the differences between 
sciences of matters of fact and eidetic sciences; in §2 he rapidly goes into the devel-
opment of the concept of  pure essence : here there is an important distinction between 
the  individual essence of a thing and its  pure essence, a fundamental distinction for 
what Husserl  intends to say in this section (although this is not clear). The distinc-
tion is this: we are concerned in this section with  individuals and their essences, 
which also have essences: essences of essences, more especially  real individuals, 
that is, with  a spatio-temporal (or at least temporal) locus in the space-time of the 
real world. In the case of any such thing, i.e., a real individual, we can distinguish 
between its  character and its spatio-temporal  locus  and distinguish them in the fol-
lowing way: suppose I take a stone or a pack of cigarettes or a psycho-physical 
individual—it is what it is and is when and where it is, and, as being when and 
where it is, it has its spatio-temporal relations to other individuals. But in respect 
of its  essence , this or any real individual could be at any other place or time—it 
just happens to be here and now but it might be there and later or earlier in so 
far as its essence is concerned. The distinction is between what the thing is in 
itself (as the respect of its essence) and its spatio-temporal, non-essential, accidental 
determinations. 
 The  essence Husserl speaks of here is  not  the  eidos , but the  individual essence of 
the thing—its fully concrete, individual  what , which is apart from its spatio-temporal 
individuation. But this individual essence of the individual  can be put  into idea . 
What does that signify? Freely speaking, it signi ﬁ es that, with respect to its  com-
plete determinacy, the individual may be taken as exemplifying something  universal 
that might be and  perhaps is exempli ﬁ ed by  other things at other times and places, 
that is, two things at different places or times or both maybe perfectly alike in their 
 what . The  universals that are exempli ﬁ ed here, however, are  more than just the 
completely determined universal in its speci ﬁ city (since above them there are others 
which are more general). Shades of brownish yellow fall under brownish yellow and 
239
14 Dorion Cairns, Empirical Types, and the Field of Consciousness
brownish yellow under yellow and yellow under  color . These  colors or chromatic 
shades have (under each) nuances of colors. There is a hierarchy of generic and 
speci ﬁ c universals. If we take the summa genera (color in general, shade in general, etc.), 
they determine in their interrelations,  a region —they are  regional essences . 
The  individua which exemplify these genera belong to this particular region of 
material things; they, with  all  their determinations, stand in the multiplicity of 
genera and species. 
 Strangely left out here, as if it did not belong to the essence of a thing, is the place 
and time of the individual (and whatever relations based on them which they may 
have). This distinction between the individual essence and the pure essence ( reine 
Wesen—eidos ) offers a tremendous dif ﬁ culty here, except for the manner in which 
pure essence is introduced here in relation to individual essence as contrasted with 
contingency, accident: this has no place in the conceptual scheme to be developed. 
The contrast that is valid and relevant here is not between the universal and its 
exempli ﬁ cation, on the one hand, and the individual—in its full determination—and 
its  eidos , on the other, which means: any attempt to introduce the traditional distinc-
tion between essential and accidental—at this point and in this manner—brings 
confusion. I can however bring such a distinction in this way: what is essential for 
something to be an exempli ﬁ cation of an  eidos ? Namely, what can I vary while it 
 remains being an exempli ﬁ cation of a genus or of a species? 
 In  Erfahrung und Urteil , Husserl distinguishes between empirical type and 
essence; an empirical type is a kind of pure essence as in the  Ideen . The word  type , 
meaning a generic or speci ﬁ c type, is used interchangeably with essence or  reine 
Wesen  up to the  Ideen . In  Erfahrung und Urteil , a distinction is made, namely, the 
distinction between  reine Wesen and  Typus . What is pre-constituted passively or 
constituted automatically, prior to any activity on the part of an ego, is the empirical 
type—it is a universal, but it subsumes under itself already  just those  variants of the 
universal that have happened to come along empirically in the life in question. Then 
comes the eidetic scientist, and guided by these generic and speci ﬁ c types, he insti-
tutes a process of free variation in phantasy; he clearly quasi-perceives variants 
which have  not come along empirically, and thus he causes to be pre-constituted  for 
himself (and grasps properly) the  pure essence , subsuming under it not only the 
actually perceived variants but all possible variants. The exposition of  Erfahrung 
und Urteil suggests that there are two  different kinds of universals, but it seems to 
me that they are the same, in one case clari ﬁ ed and in the other unclari ﬁ ed. The fact 
that the word  type is used, in one sense in some contexts and in another sense in 
other contexts, has caused problems with critics. 10 
 10  Cairns may be alluding to Alfred Schutz’s “Type and Eidos in Husserl’s Late Philosophy” (1959), 
 Collected Papers, Vol. III, ed. I. Schutz (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966). 
241
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_15, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Ideen I and Eugen Fink 
 The idea of giving an account of the in ﬂ uence of Edmund Husserl’s  Ideen I on other 
thinkers does not quite  ﬁ t the role in phenomenology played by his last research 
assistant, Eugen Fink. The most telling reason for this mismatch begins with the fact 
that Fink’s acquaintance with Husserl’s publications was not the principal source of 
his entry into and progression in understanding Husserl’s program. Unlike others 
who followed Husserl such as Martin Heidegger or Jan Patočka, Fink’s learning of 
phenomenology came primarily  ﬁ rst-hand, namely, by attending Husserl’s lectures 
over  ﬁ ve semesters before the latter’s retirement. 1 Fink, of course, carefully read the 
 Logische Untersuchungen and  Ideen I , but Husserl’s lectures were closer to exem-
plifying his actual on-going thinking and rethinking. Of course Husserl’s lectures 
were only one component of what Fink was absorbing in his studies. 
 R.  Bruzina ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Department of Philosophy, University of Kentucky ,  Lexington ,  KY ,  USA 
e-mail:  bruzina@uky.edu 
 Chapter 15 
 Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution 
 Ronald  Bruzina    
 1  The list of Fink’s courses with Husserl:
 Winter 1925/26 – Grundprobleme der Logik 
 Winter 1926/27* – Einführung in die Phänomenologie und die phänomenologische Philosophie 
 Summer 1927* – Natur und Geist 
 Winter 1927/28* – Geschichte der neueren Philosophie 
 Summer 1928* – Einleitung in die phänomenologische Psychologie 
 * includes a seminar, Phänomenologische Übungen, directed by Husserl. Fink’s  ﬁ rst university 
semester, Summer 1925, was taken at the Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, and he 
spent the summer semester 1926 at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität zu Berlin. In the winter 
semester of 1928/29, he took Heidegger’s  ﬁ rst course on his return to Freiburg as Husserl’s succes-
sor, Einleitung in die Philosophie (along with Heidegger’s Philosophische Übungen), as well as the 
last course Husserl would offer, Phänomenologie der Einfühlung, soon broke off and canceled 
when it interfered with his writing projects. 
242
R. Bruzina
  Still, whether Husserl’s lecture courses or his own readings, Fink’s understanding 
seems from the outset a grasp of philosophic  possibilities , not points of doctrine to 
be followed. His written summaries [ Nachschriften ] especially of Husserl’s lectures 
are indications that he was already thinking in terms of implications and alternatives 
that might spring from what Husserl was pursuing in his courses. It was the grasp of 
 issues and themes as they were being formulated, reconsidered, and pursued that 
mattered. And nothing less than a stunning insightfulness and rethinking mark his 
research notes, modestly before and then massively during his years of assistantship 
with Husserl—notes bespeaking an engagement of the most original kind, both 
penetrating and critical. At the same time, too, one sees that Fink learned as much 
about philosophical thinking from the lecture courses he attended by others on other 
philosophies and philosophers. 2 
 The effect of this entry into phenomenology is demonstrated dramatically when 
we look at how Fink responded to  Ideen I . He himself unambiguously situated his 
 ﬁ rst writing, the  Preisschrift , an essay written in February 1928 for a prize competi-
tion, entirely within Husserl’s work—not least of all because the topic for the prize 
was to write a study on “thinking ‘as if’,” “merely presenting something to oneself, ” 
“fantasizing.” 3 All the primary work pertinent to this topic for Fink was produced by 
Husserl,  ﬁ rst and foremost in summary treatment in  Ideen I , for which the primary 
work covering much of these matters had been done in the decade before that semi-
nal book. 4 Fink revised the essay into his dissertation, conceiving it as having two 
parts, the  ﬁ rst on two of the methodologically central operations in the work of 
phenomenological descriptive analysis—“presenti ﬁ cation [ Vergegenwärtigung ]” 
and “image [ Bild ]”(hence the eventual title of the dissertation,  Vergegenwärtigung 
und Bild ) 5 —and the second, not completed for the doctorate itself, on the question 
of temporalization,  Zeitigung , as the fundamental level of the constitution that  Ideen 
I had set aside. Indeed, it was Fink’s explicit awareness of the need to go further into 
 2  Altogether, although Husserl’s lecture courses were the most that Fink took from any one professor, 
the 15 other lecture courses in philosophy—not counting the more numerous  Übungen sessions—
comprised a rich and comprehensive surrounding for his concentration in phenomenology. 
 3  Following strictly the assigned theme, the title of Fink’s essay is  Beiträge zu einer phänomenolo-
gischen Analyse der psychischen Phänomene, die unter den vieldeutigen Ausdrücken: “ sich den-
ken, als ob, ” “ sich nur etwas vorstellen, ” “ phantasieren ”  befaßt werden. See Eugen Fink, 
 Phänomenologische Werkstatt, Eugen Fink Gesamtausgabe, 3/1 :  Teilband 1: Die Doktorarbeit 
und erste Assistenzjahre bei Husserl , ed. Ronald Bruzina (Freiburg: Verlag Karl Alber, 2006), p. 
107 for this title, and p. 108 for Fink’s“Foreword” acknowledging his dependence on Husserl’s 
work (Abbreviation EFG 3/1). 
 4  Husserl had shown Fink typed-out materials from his earlier lectures in the area of the prize-
competition topic—as e.g. in Husseriana 23,  Phantasie, Bildbewusstsein, Erinnerung, Zur 
Phänomenologie der anschaulichen Vergegenwärtigungen, Texte aus dem Nachlass (1892–1925) , 
ed. Eduard Marbach (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1980)–, it may be supposed, but there is no 
documentation con ﬁ rming it. 
 5  The dissertation was in fact presented with the very same title as the prize-essay bore (see foot-
note 3 above). When, however, it was published in Husserl’s  Jahrbuch für Philosophie und 
phënomenologische Forschung, IX (1930), it was titled  Vergegenwärtigung und Bild. 
243
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
temporalization that required the dissertation’s  ﬁ rst-part work to be recognized as 
provisional and incomplete: “[With] the regression from identical sense into the living 
experiences in which that sense becomes conscious, the phenomenological sphere 
properly speaking is not yet reached.” This stage of experiential intentionality 
concentrates on unities achieved in  acts , with the result that “radical phenomeno-
logical understanding” is not gained: “The act-intentional layout of the whole of a 
phenomenological analysis of constitution can itself only have the function of an 
initial guiding theme [ Leitfaden ] for the proper, compactly full sense of constitutive 
clari ﬁ cation.” And this means that ultimately full clari ﬁ cation is only achieved with 
“an origin-level return into the temporal constitution of acts themselves.” 6 
 Clearly indicated here is the kind of thinking that was rapidly maturing as Fink 
became a research assistant to Husserl (late 1928 until Husserl’s death in April of 
1938). Fink’s working for Husserl soon became working  with Husserl, which meant 
that he engaged  actively in advancing Husserl’s phenomenological program. It was 
not just a matter of following Husserl’s lead, respecting and adopting all the already 
laid down patterns of overall framing and interpretation, such as in  Ideen I, but rather 
of probingly  re -considering what needed to be taken up again precisely because of the 
 initial stage status of that broad picture of the scope of reduction-led phenomenology. 
Such was indeed what Fink saw Husserl himself undertaking in his lectures and Fink’s 
notes show from the start how Fink’s thinking through Husserl’s phenomenological 
achievements are their  rethinking. It is a stunning record of effort that expands as his 
years with Husserl begin— ﬁ ve folders of notes from 1927 to1929 for reworking 
his 1927 prize-essay to be more than a piece of writing that was to become a doctoral 
dissertation. 7 It was to be a major step in the reworking of phenomenology as such 
by taking up the very aims that de ﬁ ne Husserl’s phenomenology as a project and a 
program, namely, to reconsider Husserl’s investigational studies so as to refashion more 
radically their phenomenological meaning in view of the advancing depth of Husserl’s 
analyses—most especially in terms of the reinterpretive implication of describing the 
base-level and all-comprehensive constitution endlessly done and redone in temporal-
ization,  Zeitigung. Fink’s “Introduction” to his dissertation emphasized just this. 
 Issues for the reinterpretation implicated by the role of the fuller analysis of 
temporalization abound here. For example, together with the question of time in the 
 ﬁ ve mentioned folders, 8 the status of “subjectivity” itself (including its I-character) 
on the one hand and on the other the character of the world are repeatedly raised, 
 6  From the dissertation text in Eugen Fink,  Studien zur Phänomenologie 1930–1039, (Den Haag: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 19. My translation, from this collection of Fink’s Husserl-period publica-
tions, of which only three other of its  ﬁ ve essays have been translated. (See footnote 15 below.) 
 7  EFG 3/1, Z-I, Z-II, Z-III, Z-IV, and Z-V. For a fuller treatment of Fink’s idea in the full disserta-
tion project, see my  Edmund Husserl & Eugen Fink, Beginnings and Ends in Phenomenology, 
1928–1938 (New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 2004), Ch. 1, 17–19, and the surround-
ing account of the active scene in philosophy at Freiburg before and after 1928. 
 8  For example, in the  ﬁ rst folder of notes Fink has a transcription of his  ﬁ rst recorded discussion 
with Husserl, from December 1, 1927 (EFG 3/1, Z-I 23a–24b), and in it Fink poses two questions 
regarding temporality, one about the fundamentality of the noesis-noema correlation, the other 
about if temporality can have a beginning or end. 
244
R. Bruzina
both require a penetrating understanding of what the “transcendental reduction” 
means. So it is, then, that as Fink began his assistantship (late 1928 and early 1929), 
Husserl asked him to edit his Bernau manuscripts. Thereafter, Fink works again and 
again at clarifying the same themes. 9 
 The full complement of the materials Fink wrote—folders of his notes (1927–
1940); typed drafts for Husserl to consider, of which the two  Beilagen in Husserl’s 
 Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie, 
Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie 10 are examples; drafts of 
letters Husserl asked him to write—are an extraordinary resource far beyond the 
usual expository treatment of Husserl’s phenomenology generally seen, especially 
in embodying the kind of self-critical return to beginnings that was supposed to be 
the core of phenomenology’s advance. More than that, the counter-orthodoxy inter-
pretive recasting Fink was thinking through for and with Husserl was a unique kind 
of difference in cooperation. Husserl spoke of the two of them as “thinking together,” 
“like two communicating vessels,” 11 “an extraordinary collaborator,” with a mind 
“that productively thinks with you, that  ﬁ lls in gaps and understands how a develop-
ment is going.” 12 It was a situation that very few had any idea was going on in this 
two-man “phenomenological workshop” of the last decade of Husserl’s life, and it 
was only by happy accident that this body of materials came to be known. 13 Dorion 
 9  While all-pervasive, samples of these can be found in EFG 3/1, Z-IV Z- 11a–b, on the question of 
how the “intentionality” of temporality’s three dimensions are to be conceptualized for which he, 
in his dissertation, proposes “de-presenting [ Entgegenwärtigung ]” as more suitable; 15a–18b and 
27a–29a on the reduction and the world; and 110a to 112b, on “pure consciousness” and “abso-
lute” being (all approximately from late 1928 into 1929, though not speci ﬁ cally dated). 
 10  I.e., Husserliana 6 that almost everyone is familiar with:  Die Krisis der europäischen 
Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie, Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologis-
che Philosophie , ed. Walter Biemel (Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1954). Drafts written by Fink are 
noted as such, Beilagen XXI and XXIX. Many portions of text in which Fink’s suggestions have 
been incorporated are noted in the “Textkritische Anmerkungen zum Hauptext,” 521–43. Finally, 
the most extraordinary set of drafts by Fink for Husserl comprise Fink‘s,  VI. Cartesianische 
Meditation, Teil 1 Die Idee einer transzendentalen Methodenlehre, Texte aus dem Nachlass Eugen 
Finks (1932) mit Anmerkungen und Beilagen aus dem Nachlass Edmund Husserls (1933/34), 
Husserliana Dokumente II/1, hrsg. von Hans Ebeling, Jann Holl and Guy van Kerckhoven;  Teil 2 
Ergänzungsband, Texte aus dem Nachlass Eugen Finks (1930–1932) mit Anmerkungen und 
Beilagen aus dem Nachlass Edmund Husserls (1932/33), Husserliana Dokumente II/2, hrsg. von 
Guy van Kerckhoven, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988. English translation by 
Ronald Bruzina, Eugen Fink,  Sixth Cartesian Meditation, The Idea of A Transcendental Theory of 
Method (Bloomington/Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1995). 
 11  From a letter by Husserl to Father Daniel Feuling, from March 30, 1933, in Edmund Husserl, 
 Briefwechsel, Husserliana Dokumente III/ I–X, edited by Karl Schuhmann with Elisabeth 
Schumann (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994), VII, 89. 
 12  From a letter by Husserl to his close friend Gustav Albrecht, from October 7,1934, in  Briefwechsel, 
III/IX, 105. Husserl also speaks of certain of Fink’s characteristics that are nonetheless a bit wor-
risome to Husserl. For a fuller presentation of such remarks as given above, including Fink’s own 
remarks on their relationship, see my  Edmund Husserl and Eugen Fink, 49–54. 
 13  A brief account of this is given in the opening pages of the “Preface” to my  Edmund Husserl and 
Eugen Fink. 
245
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
Cairns’ fascinating  Conversations with Husserl and Fink 14 almost displays this 
cooperative effort, but in Cairns’ book what we have are conversations with  Cairns, 
by Husserl and then by Fink, not those of Husserl  and Fink  with themselves. That 
remained out of sight, on the margins. 
 What  does show is how distinctive Fink’s contributions were; for in these 
 Conversations the kinds and character of points that Cairns’ notes down from Fink 
have nowhere their like outside of Fink’s own writings in phenomenology; and these 
are relatively few: two collections of essays. 15 
 Long after Fink’s death (1975) his “Sixth Cartesian Meditation” with its atten-
dant draft texts 16  was edited and published, to reveal dramatically more of that 
Freiburg “phenomenology workshop.” And now,  ﬁ nally, the complete edition of 
Fink’s research notes and drafts from the period of Husserl’s and Fink’s collabora-
tive labors is appearing. 17 Of the essays in the two collections already mentioned, 
probably the single most comprehensive treatment of Husserl’s phenomenology is 
Fink’s essay published originally in 1933 in  Kant-Studien, “Die phänomenologis-
che Philosophie Edmund Husserls in der gegenwärtigen Kritik.” 18 The essay offers 
a carefully and precisely drawn distinction between Husserl’s phenomenology and 
Neo-Kantianism, from the vantage-point of Fink’s own reframing of Husserl’s pro-
gram beyond the, in many respects, Neo-Kantian-seeming schema of  Ideen I . In 
other words, Fink adopts the critical points expressed in his research notes to explain 
 14  Phaenomenologica 66, edited by Richard M. Zaner, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976. 
 15  These are: Eugen Fink,  Studien Zur Phänomenologie 1930–1939 , Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1966, and Eugen Fink,  Nähe und Distanz, Phänomenologische Vorträge und Aufsätze, hrsg. von 
Franz-Anton Schwarz, Freiburg/München: Verlag Karl Alber, 1976.Of the 18 essays in these two 
collections, only the following have been translated:
 Studien zur Phänomenologie ;
 – “The Phenomenological Philosophy of Edmund Husserl and Contemporary Criticism,” see 
footnote 18 below; 
 – “What Does the Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl Want to Accomplish?” tr. by Arthur 
Grogan, in  Research in Phenomenology , II (1972), 5–27; 
 – “The Problem of the Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl,” tr. Robert M. Harlan, in  Apriori and 
World, European Contributions to Husserlian Phenomenology, ed., William McKenna, Robert M. 
Harlan, and Laurence E. Winters (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981), 21–55. 
 Nähe und Distanz: 
 – “Operative Concepts in Husserl’s Phenomenology,” tr. William McKenna, in The  Human Being 
in Action: the Irreducible Element in Man, Part II , ed. Anna-Teresa Tynieniecka, Analecta 
Phenomenologica 7 (Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel, 1978), 56–70. 
 16  See footnote 10 above. 
 17  Eugen Fink,  Phänomenologische Werkstatt, Eugen Fink Gesamtausgabe, 3/1–4, ed. by Ronald 
Bruzina (Freiburg: Verlag Karl Alber, 2006) for Vol. 3/1, 2008 for 3/2, and with Vols.. 3/3 and 3/4 
under way. 
 18  “Die phänomenologische Philosophie Edmund Husserls in der gegenwärtigen Kritik,” originally 
in  Kant-Studien XXXVIII (1933), pp. 321–383, and republished in Fink,  Studien zur 
Phänomenologie, 79–156. The English translation is  The Phenomenology of Husserl: Selected 
Critical Readings , trans. and ed. R.O. Elveton (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1970), 73–147. 
246
R. Bruzina
how, in moving beyond the “ Ideen -project” and focusing on a temporalization-grounded 
reconception of the phenomenological reduction, one comes to a clearer idea not 
only of how transcendental phenomenology is fundamentally  unlike Neo-Kantianism, 
but also of how one can ful ﬁ ll the promise of  radicality for phenomenology’s initial 
thrust of reduction beyond the mundane notions and schemata that can remain in the 
 pre-ultimate status of Husserl’s best-known writings. 19 
 This pre-ultimacy characterizes the situation of us readers of Husserl; for we are 
likely to remain largely in Husserl’s own situation as he entered his retirement years. In 
his remarkable “Nachwort zu meinen  Ideen,” 20 Husserl, like Moses, found himself  not 
yet in  that long-sought “Promised Land,” seeing it still but not actually  come into  it. In 
this, nonetheless, he is  at another beginning , even if long past his  ﬁ rst steps to reach his 
goal; and in this he can now call himself “a  true beginner [ einen wirklichen  Anfänger ],” 
someone who still must try to bring that “promised land” of phenomenology to its 
“fully cultivated form,”  21 even if he suspects he will not actually achieve this. 
 What I  ﬁ nd Fink doing in the years after Husserl wrote these lines was in effect 
to contribute directly in the labor of this “full cultivation.” Husserl had transformed 
this land of philosophy by making it  phenomenological ; and Fink was helping to 
make that transformation  adequate to the very program principles that governed 
Husserl’s judgment of his own stage of un ﬁ nished advance. 
 Ideen I Does Not Get Us There Yet 
 Introduction 
 It is well known that Husserl at 70 years of age saw himself as  ﬁ nally “a  true begin-
ner” in his phenomenological labors, that the best part, the  ful ﬁ lling part of his efforts 
laid ahead of him, and that he saw clearly all that had preceded was simply prepara-
tion for the  ﬁ nal achievement, his “Promised Land.” 22 But what exactly was this 
achievement  to be? Had he not already laid out the essentials of a genuinely transcen-
dental phenomenology of the constitution of the things we experience in the world, 
 19  One should note that it is Husserl himself who warns of the provisionality of the studies in both 
 Logical Investigations (Introduction to Volume II, in particular §3 and §6, Note 2) and in  Ideen I 
(even if he does not make it a matter speci ﬁ cally of naïve-mundane conceptual remnants as Fink 
does). 
 20  Nachwort,” Husserliana V, 138–162. 
 21  Ibid., 161: “Der Verfasser sieht das unendlich offene Land der wahren Philosophie, das ‘Gelobte 
Land’, ausgebreitet vor sich, das er selbst nicht mehr als schon durchkultiviertes erleben wird.” 
 22  Edmund Husserl, “Nachwort,” in  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, Drittes Buch,  Husserliana V, hrsg. von Marly Biemel (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1971), 161: “Der Verfasser sieht das unendlich offene Land der wahren Philosophie, das ‘Gelobte 
Land’, ausgebreitet vor sich, das er selbst nicht mehr als schon durchkultiviertes erleben wird.”  
247
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
and, perhaps more than any other work, in  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie 
und phänomenologischen Philosophie, Erstes Buch ? Was not the making of phe-
nomenology basically done, with only some loose ends left to be taken care of? 
 I wish to present a case that having “true beginner” status was not simply a matter 
of an event in the life of the  person Husserl, but an event  intrinsic to the making of 
phenomenology,  and consequent upon the essentials of its method . And  this is how 
we must understand his labors in the  ﬁ nal decade of his life. But I also want to 
emphasize two other things: (a) that Husserl’s  ﬁ nal decade was a joint effort, and 
that this was indispensable to its fuller achievement; and (b) that this achievement 
showed how it is essentially an  open program  of investigation rather than one with 
a de ﬁ nitive attainable completeness. This second point, however—by virtue of 
space constraints—can only begin to be indicated in the present essay. 23 
 Ideen I, an Incomplete Beginning More Critically Considered 
 Quite apart from the three-part structure of the full-scale three-volume “ Ideen -
project,”—of which the second and third books remain in preliminary draft form at 
best—Husserl comments again and again in the various chapters of  Ideen I  that the 
treatments they offer are preliminary: they are an indispensable  ﬁ rst stage effort, but 
they need to be considered further. 24  The status of the book demands that one not  stop 
with its analyses, but rather take them up again to move its initiating momentum fur-
ther. Thus Husserl himself calls  Ideen I  “fragments [ Bruchstücken ]” for beginning phe-
nomenology. 25  And he writes: “I would like to hope that those who come after me will 
take up these beginnings and steadily carry them further, but also correct their great 
imperfections—imperfections that can hardly be avoided in a science’s beginnings” 26 
 23  See the article referred to in footnote 34 below for some of the further treatment of this point. 
 24  The very title of  Ideen I, Ideen  zu  einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, (my bold face) indicates that the book is working  toward an achievement, rather than 
being its de ﬁ nitive completion. The  ﬁ rst book itself, as an  Allgemeine Einführung in die reine 
Phänomenologie,  reinforces its initial and introductory status. Within the texts from which I draw 
my material here, note the following remarks. (1) “The indications just given make us sensitive to 
how far we are from understanding phenomenology” ([143], in the pagination of the 1913 edition, 
given here for all quotations from  Ideen I) . (2) “Here, in the context of our merely initiating 
meditations, [some] parts of phenomenology cannot be treated systematically” (200). Finally, 
speaking of noesis and noema, Husserl writes: (3) “The parallelisms obtaining here—and there are 
many of them that are all too easily confused with one another—are fraught with great dif ﬁ culties 
that still need clari ﬁ cation” (207). (My translations) Finally, the corrective process is explicitly 
mentioned: “[I]t is to be noted that in phenomenology as it begins all concepts, all terms, have to 
remain in a certain way  ﬂ uid, always ready to become differentiated in accord with the advances 
made in the analysis of consciousness and the recognition of new phenomenological strata within 
what is at  ﬁ rst seen in undifferentiated unity” (170). 
 25  Again, “Nachwort,” Hua V, 161. 
 26  Op. cit.,   161–62. 
248
R. Bruzina
 Karl Schumann has detailed some of the efforts Husserl had taken as he now 
looked over  Ideen I to improve it. 27  More than anything else it is the sense of the 
reduction that he wishes to enforce, and relative to this the emphasis on how tran-
scendental phenomenology is to be distinguished from psychology. Yet some years 
before this burst of attention given to revising  Ideen I in 1929–1930—as again 
Schuhmann points out—he had already acknowledged serious disadvantages in the 
way he set out his ideas in that book. This we can see in the volumes of  Erste 
Philosophie, especially its second volume. 28 Yet perhaps the most serious limitation 
in  Ideen I  is the lack of full treatment of the ultimate constitutive “absolute” of  tem-
poralization, an omission that is well-known because Husserl himself explains it as 
necessary in §81 of Chap. 2 in Part III. Perhaps the pedagogical purpose of the 
book, rather than any systematic neglect, was Husserl’s reason for not making more 
explicit mention of this limitation in his retrospective in the 1929 “Nachwort.” Yet 
setting aside the account of temporalization is not just a matter of leaving out of the 
whole “picture-puzzle” of phenomenology one set of pieces that would complete it, 
whose absence for the moment does not actually diminish our view of the whole 
“picture” itself. It is far more serious than that, and while in fact Husserl does give 
many indications of matters that need further study, he does not say  in just what 
ways  setting aside an adequate analysis of  temporalization 29 leaves the analyses he 
does provide  provisional and  un ﬁ nished. 
 Paul Ricoeur, in his masterful French translation and commentary on  Ideen I , 30 
published in 1950 just as the  ﬁ rst volumes of Husserliana were appearing, 31 already 
adverts us to heavy implications of the way in which the analyses of “Intentionality 
as Phenomenology’s Principle Topic” (the title of §84, in Chap. 2 of Part III) begin 
right after the mention of this limitation in §81 and proceed, without temporaliza-
tion, in full swing. These analyses, from §84 on, through Chaps. 3 and 4, have been 
taken more or less as the Bible-like source for understanding the structural complex 
of functioning intentionality, being credited with perhaps more basic  ﬁ nality than is 
 27  See the “Einleitung” to the revised edition of  Ideen I, Hua III/1, xlix–lvii. 
 28  Edmund Husserl,  Erste Philosophie (1923/24), Zweiter Teil, edited by Rudolf Boehm, Husserliana 
VIII (Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1959), Beilage XX, from 1924, gives the most speci ﬁ c of Husserl’s 
self-criticism. Again Schumann includes in his edition of Hua III/1 (liv–lv) the instructive com-
ments and corrections Husserl saw to be needed, written in on the pages of his copies of  Ideen I 
and placed by Schumann in Hua III/2, companion volume to the main text. 
 29  It should be remembered that it is not temporalization  as such — Zeitigung —that is the focus of 
Husserl’s remarks in §81 and §82, but the temporality of  experiential streaming precisely as the 
 transcendental to be focused on here in  Ideen I . Husserl does not even use the word “temporaliza-
tion” [ Zeitigung ] when he speaks of this way the experiential transcendental is not “in truth the last 
thing,” “the Ultimate”— “das Letzte.” All he says is that “the transcendental absolute” reached in 
the reductions has “its proto-source in an ultimate true Absolute.” Hua III/1, §81. [162–63]. 
 30  Edmund Husserl,  Idées directrices pour une phénoménologie, translated and annotated by Paul 
Ricoeur (Paris: Gallimard, 1950). 
 31  Namely,  Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, Hua I;  Die Idee der Phänomenologie, 
Hua II; and  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie, Erstes 
Buch, Hua III. 
249
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
justi ﬁ able. 32 This status of unquestionability in its basics is what Ricoeur challenges 
in a note to §85, one of the key sections on the detailing of constituents as its title 
makes explicit in just four words: “Sensuous ὑλή—intentional   m o r jή .”To this title 
itself Ricoeur writes the following:
The study of hylē pertains to the constitution of objects in consciousness to the extent that 
intentionality animates it. The “hyletic” corresponds to the “noetic” as matter to form. But 
in a more profound sense, hylē has to do with the constitution of time and the Urkonstitution 
of the I (cf. [163]): it is the  ﬂ ow of “adumbrations” that gives immanent duration to the 
intention of an object. As E. Fink has emphasized, if we do not get all the way to the con-
stitution of the hylē (and thus to the constitution of time and of the pure I), the constitution 
of the thing itself cannot take on its radical sense, that is, as creative sense. The beginning 
of §85 gives notice that, by not “descending to the dark depths of the ultimate consciousness 
that constitutes all temporality in living experience,” the analysis of Ideen I will remain relative 
only to transcending intentionality. Same restriction in the last paragraph on [172]. 33 
  The real question, now, is what we might  ﬁ nd if we turned to the actual source 
in which Ricoeur  ﬁ nds Fink’s “emphasizing” of the unconsidered dimension of “the 
constitution of the  hylē, ” namely, Fink’s 1933  Kantstudien essay. In a passage that 
carries on for a good 20 pages, Fink elaborates on the points in Ricoeur’s note in a 
critical discussion of the whole matter that is Husserl’s concern in his “Nachwort” 
about how to make clear the distinction between psychological consciousness and 
transcendental “consciousness.” 34 Using a minimum of phrasings from Fink’s text, 
let me review brie ﬂ y the relevant points Fink makes in his treatment:
 32  Indeed, Ricoeur himself unabashedly points out serious dif ﬁ culties in  Ideen I in the “Introduction” 
to his translation see xiv–xv. 
 33  Idees, n ote 1 to §85 [171], 287–88. A translation of Ricoeur’s “Introduction” and notes, by Bond 
Harris and Jacqueline Bouchard Spurlock, ed. by Pol Vandvelde, has been published as Paul 
Ricoeur,  A Key to Husserl’s Ideen I, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1996. The translation 
here is largely the one in this book, but I have modi ﬁ ed it slightly. I might suggest, too, that in the 
last line above “transcending intentionality,” a close rendering of Ricoeur’s  l’intentonnalité tran-
scendante, could be translated as “intentionality aiming at the transcendent.” In the passage in the 
same §85, Husserl points out that he is leaving aside the questions (a) whether the sensuously 
experiential could ever be without “animating apprehensional take [ beseelende Auffassung ],” i.e., 
without “intentional function,” and (b) whether intentionality could be  concrete without “the 
sensuous.” Ricoeur’s translation for  Abschattungen is  esquisses , which in a way is better in its 
suggesting detail while slowly less-essential features might diminish, than “adumbrations” with its 
connotation of general vagueness. 
 34  Eugen Fink, “Die phänomenologische Philosophie Edmund Husserls in der gegenwärtigen 
Kritik, mit einem Vorwort von Edmund Husserl”  Kantstudien 38 (Berlin 1933), 319–61; reprinted 
in Eugen Fink,  Studien zur Phänomenologie, ( den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 79–156; English 
translation by Roy Elveton,  The Phenomenology of Husserl: Selected Critical Readings, Chicago: 
Quadrangle Books, 1970. The pages from 122 to the end of the essay on page 145 in the English 
translation deal with the distinction referred to here, while the treatment on which Ricoeur bases 
his remark is run from page 123 to 137. Early in this passage Fink discusses the distinction between 
the transcendental and the psychological, asserting quite straightforwardly that “The  Ideas does 
not give a thorough discussion of the difference between the psychological and the transcendental 
noemas.” (124.) In almost all cases of cited material from Elveton’s translation I have modi ﬁ ed the 
wording. In my references here I give the pagination in the English translation  ﬁ rst, then that in 
 Studien , and  ﬁ nally that in the  Kantstudien original. 
250
R. Bruzina
  1.  Ideen I is primarily and centrally oriented to the question of consciousness as 
intentional speci ﬁ cally in relation  to an object , and this determines the charac-
terization of the “constituting” involved here in  terms of relating to the object. 35  
  2.  Thus intentionality and constitution are represented in  Ideen I in terms of “acts” 
focused on objects. This orientation accords with psychology but, Fink argues, 
it does not genuinely reach the character of  fundamental transcendental constitu-
tion because phenomenology’s true core theme is “the  world’s  becoming in the 
constitution of transcendental subjectivity.” 36 For characterizing  this constitu-
tion, “acts” of intending aimed at “objects”—are too much in the mold of 
in-the-world doings and hence cannot represent the constituting of the  world in 
which they function. Act-intentional analysis must be  surmounted in order to 
clarify transcendental constituting life properly. 37 
  3.  Hence the “heterological basic principle in the idea of constitution: ‘sensual 
 hylē and intentional  morphē, ” cannot mean that  transcendental analysis is  ulti-
mately “heterological.” This heterological feature remains naïve and relative 
because it is offered on  “phenomenology’s  ﬁ rst problem-level.” This “dualism 
of heterological moments” described in the analyses of constitution actually 
represent “relative strata [when taken] within the uni ﬁ ed constitutive disclosure 
of the world’s origin from within the depths of the transcendental subjectivity’s 
life.” 38 
  4.  The concept of the  noema, in the strati ﬁ cation found in  Ideen I thus needs to be 
radically reconsidered in order for its  ultimate and genuinely fundamental  tran-
scendental role to be disclosed, speci ﬁ cally as having to do basically with the 
 world as such. 39 
  5.  The properly  transcendental noema, accordingly, “is the world itself as the unitary-
whole-of-holding [ Geltungseinheit ] lying in the belief belonging to the streaming 
world-apperception in transcendental subjectivity.” 40 Since in transcendental 
constituting “life” all determinate “having” or “intending” is of “meaning,” of 
 35  Fink, “Husserl’s Philosophy and Contemporary Criticism,” 126–28, 133–34, and 136–37 
[ Studien, 134–136;  Kantstudien , 365–67]. 
 36  Elveton, 130 [ Studien , 139; Kantstudien, 370]; my italics. 
 37  Elveton, 130–34 [ Studien , 139–43;  Kantstudien , 369–73]. 
 38  Elveton, 136 [ Studien , 146;  Kantstudien , 376] (my italics here and my phrase in brackets for 
clari ﬁ cation ). The relativizing is expressed as follows: “In the provisional conceptual indicating of 
the constitution problematic constitutive achievement is identi ﬁ ed with the  act’s intentional 
bestowing of sense, so that, measured by this preliminary indicative concept of constitution, the 
deeper lying constitution by transcendental temporalization [ Zeitigung ] cannot be brought out; and 
so ‘hyle’ had to appear as sheer matter.” 
 39  Elveton, 124–25 [ Studien , 132–33;  Kantstudien , 364–65]. 
 40  Elveton, 124. [ Studien, 132;  Kantstudien , 364] The German in the  Kantstudien  article is as 
follows: “Mit anderen Worten, das transzendentale Noema ist die Welt selbst als die im Glauben 
der strömenden Weltapperzeption der transzendentalen Subjektivität liegende Geltungseinheit.” 
( Studien 132;  Kantstudien 364).  Geltung is usually translated as “validity,” but because of the logical 
connotation so predominantly clinging to “validity,” this word does not suggest the  phenomenological 
force of “holding-and-counting”in  gelten here. 
251
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
“sense”— Sinn  is the word almost always used in Fink’s text here (as in 
 Sinn-Haben or  Sinn-Meinen; Studien, 123–24 [KS, 363]); and since here the 
transcendental “sense [ Sinn ]” which is the  noema, in its always temporalized 
consolidation of the partialities of protention and retention, is  “that-which-
 holds in  world -holding,” the properly “ transcendental  noema is the  being 
[ das Seiend e]  itself” that is experienced. This is what is most speci ﬁ cally tran-
scendental about the noema “in the hitherto never recognized depth of its hidden 
sense-as-being [ seines Seinssinnes ]” 41  
 6.  Here is the context for another point that Ricoeur underscores regarding the 
limitations of Husserl’s analysis in  Ideen I : the  creativity of the “constitution of 
the object.” This descriptive term “creativity” has to be handled carefully. 
Obviously it is not a matter of the production of physical substance, but rather 
of the  sense -consolidations that are the manifestly appearing and sense-modally 
experiencing of temporalizedly determinate Somethings. 42 It is a matter of the 
dimensional character intrinsic to the whole order of “sense,” and hence as well 
to the order of the perceiving sense(s) involved in experiencing the world: “the 
whole world has its whole being as a kind of ‘sense’ [‘ Sinn’ ], which presup-
poses absolute consciousness as the  ﬁ eld for sense-giving [ Sinngebung ].” 43 
 It is this same productivity in the “realm” of  sense (which phenomenologically 
embraces absolutely everything) that is called  creative precisely because sense is 
not a matter of  receptivity (which is a mark of the psychological). At the same time, 
as Fink points out in the pages where the perhaps disturbing designation “creative” 
is discussed, to pose the distinction between the psychological and the transcendental-
constitutive as the difference between “receptivity” and “productivity” is to remain 
within  mundane conceptual contrasts. What kind of “relationship” transcendental 
“constitution” properly understood should be positively characterized as signifying—
and he insists that actually it should be deemed neither “receptive” nor “productive”—
can only be “indicated by carrying out constitutive investigations.” 44 Before looking 
further into any such characterization, however, it is crucial to be clear about 
this category of sense (or: meaning) in phenomenology. Or, rather than “category,” 
perhaps sense/meaning would be better considered as the very “realm” or “dimension” 
or “determinability” for what phenomenology takes up regarding the core matters 
in experiential life in order to disclose their actual phenomenological character, 
role, and signi ﬁ cance in the reduction-guided analyses that disclose how they come 
about and function in what is called “transcendental originative constitution.” 
 41  Elveton, 125, [ Studien, 133;  Kantstudien , 364] my boldface. 
 42  In  Ideen I Husserl’s use of such words as  Erzeugung, Produktion, and  schöpferisch should be 
read as meaning ultimately the syntheses of  sense — Sinn , but equally as well  Bedeutung —i.e., 
 meaning in general, both experiential (predominantly termed  Sinn ) and linguistically articulated 
(predominantly termed  Bedeutung ). In this, as we see in §122, the emphasis is on the character of 
these “productions” (positing, counter-positing, setting as antecedents or as consequences, etc.) as  free 
and spontaneous —by virtue of being of  meaning as such —rather than as  causally effectuated. 
 43  Ideen I , §55, [107]. 
 44  Elveton, 134. [ Studien , 143;  Kantstudien , 373]. 
252
R. Bruzina
 The Task at Hand, Basic Principles 
 Transitional Considerations 
 I n the transformation of the matters of ordinary life’s experiences into properly 
phenomenological terms via the epochē, Husserl in  Ideen I gives many indications 
of the distinctive, unique, the  sui generis character that everything is to take on, even 
if this transformation cannot be achieved all at once. Indeed the indication he gives 
at the very beginning in his “Introduction” to that book characterizes the phenom-
ena of phenomenology’s analyses as  irreal —irreal. 45 The point is repeated a page 
later: “. . . [I]t will be further shown that that all transcendentally puri ﬁ ed ‘lived 
experiences [ Erlebnisse ] are irrealities [ Irrealitäten ],’ and thereby are not ordered in 
terms of naïve conceptions about the ‘actual world.’” 46 The effect of this character-
ization is to “do away with the barriers to cognition” and the “one-sided direction 
in looking at things” that prevent gaining a full grasp of “consciousness” and “phe-
nomena” as such. 47 
 This is where the sentence quoted above (#6 in the previous subsection), about 
“the whole world’s” having “its whole being as a kind of ‘sense’ [‘ Sinn’ ],” by virtue 
of a “sense-giving [ Sinngebung ],” 48 takes on its full weight: phenomena are “irreal” 
because they are matters intrinsically of  sense as such. Let me offer just three texts 
on the intrinsic constitution of “irreal” phenomena as sense:
  (1)  From §86. “The Functional Problems”—speci ﬁ cally the noetic “animating” of 
hyletic sense so as to have “apprehensional” capability (Husserl’s term: 
 Auffassung ):
 Consciousness is precisely consciousness “of” something; it is of its essence  to bear in 
itself “sense,” the quintessence, so to speak, of “soul,” “spirit,” “reason.” Consciousness is 
not a name for “psychical complexes,” for “contents” fused together, for “bundles” or 
streams of “sensations” which, in themselves without sense, also cannot lend any “sense” 
to whatever mixture, but is through and through “consciousness”. . . . Consciousness is 
 45  Hua III/1, [3]. The English writes “irreal” exactly like the German. The translations here are my 
own, but in many subsequent quotations I make of Fred Kersten’s translation, Edmund Husserl, 
 Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Philosophy, The Hague: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1983, although in these cases I usually modify the translation. Page 
numbers are given in the original German pagination, and as such are placed in brackets [NN]. 
Kersten’s translation retains these page numbers in the margins. 
 46  Op. cit, [4]. 
 47  Op. cit, [3]. The conjunction of “consciousness” and “phenomena” is obvious from the whole 
passage here, but the two terms are not actually placed in a single-sentence statement of the “ ﬁ eld” 
in question, the “ ﬁ eld of phenomenology.” What Husserl does write, however, is that  phenomena 
as “‘transcendentally’ puri ﬁ ed phenomena” become the “ ﬁ eld of phenomenology” (ibid). 
 48  Cf.  Ideen I , §55, [107]. 
253
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
therefore  toto coelo different from what sensualism will only see, from what in fact is irrational 
stuff without sense . . . 49 
 (2)  From §88—“Really Inherent and Intentional Components of Lived Experience. 
The Noema”:
  In every case the noematic correlate, which is called “ sense ” here (in a very extended 
signi ﬁ cation) is to be taken  precisely  in the way it lies “immanently” in the lived experi-
ence of perceiving, of judging, of liking, etc.; that is, just as it is offered to us  when we 
inquire  purely  into this living experience itself. 50 
 (3)  Finally, from §90—The “Noematic Sense” and the Distinction between 
“Immanent” and “Actual Objects”:
 Like perception,  every intentional lived experience—and this is just what makes up the 
fundamental part of intentionality—has its “intentional  object ,” i.e.,  its objective sense.  
In other words: “to  make /have  sense [ Sinn zu haben ]” (or: “to take  in terms of sense ”), is 
the fundamental characteristic of all consciousness which, therefore, is not just any 
lived experience [ Erlebnis ] whatever, but rather a “noetically” sense-having/making lived 
experience. 51 
 Once again, it should be clear that, whatever our imaginative inclinations may 
perhaps be to “visualize” what kind of “unit” the integrating of the kinds of sense in 
play here might be—the hyletic, the noetic, the noematic, and the object—they one 
and all must be thought of  as sense , not in any way as  things posited as in them-
selves physically  real . More than that, the manner in which they are thought of as 
“brought together” in the experience has to be in terms  precisely of  sense-com-
plexes , as senses not so much “inter woven ” as in an inter play of “coherence.” The 
manner of their “coherence” has to be nothing like what we  ﬁ nd in the interplay of 
elements or particles or masses of any kind of material substance. These “senses” 
are precisely the modes primarily by which something is  the phenomenon for  per-
ceptual intending. They cannot be taken in terms of the things in the world that these 
senses  bring to appear, but as that which is the  antecedent, in the “realm” of sense, 
 for those things’ very appearing thereby enabling the taking of the appearings as  of 
the  “things themselves.” Here is where we might  ﬁ nd the grounding for Husserl’s 
proposals that phenomenology be the antecedent to any science, any psychology, 
and, more comprehensively, any determinations that are ontological or metaphysi-
cal such as are inevitably built into and presupposed by the methodologies of natural 
 49  Op. cit. , [176]; my boldface for emphasis here and in the following two quotations. Note an allied 
remark from §85 “Sensuous ὑλήv—intentional μορφήv” : “These noeses make up what is speci ﬁ c 
to  nous in the broadest sense  of the word . . . .At the same time, it is not unwelcome that the word, 
nous, recalls one of its distinctive signi ﬁ cations, namely, precisely ‘sense,’ although the ‘sense-
bestowal’ which is effected in the noetic moments comprises many different things and only as 
foundation < is > a “sense-bestowal” joined onto the succinct [ prägnant ] concept of sense.” 
Translation modi ﬁ ed. 
 50  Ideen I [182]. Translation modi ﬁ ed. 
 51  Op. cit. [185]. Translation modi ﬁ ed. 
254
R. Bruzina
or human sciences. 52 This would mean, too, that the  manner of the “distinction 
between,” and then the “interplay of,” sense-“components” cannot be left to being 
simply obvious as “psychological” factors now stipulated as transformed into 
“transcendental” factors; for it is not clear how this transformation  changes the 
otherwise mundane character of the components’  compositionality: they can still 
seem to be cast in the mold of functional unit-parts in an as it were psychological 
“mechanism.” 53 
 Here, however, I must turn to the kinds of sense that Husserl himself goes on to 
inquire into in the phenomenology that, meant to move beyond the uni ﬁ cation of the 
three senses that compose perceptual experience, takes up the matter of  Urzeitigung , 
the true absolute of constitutive origin. 
 The Character of the Conceptuality for Analyzing 
Origination and Transcendental Constitution, 
i.e., for Sense-Constitution as the Ground-Level 
for Consciousness 
 First Point:  Access to Urzeitigung 
 Every “going on” of cognitive effort—which here means getting to the genetic tem-
poralizing of my own perceptual experience—is itself an instance of a “going on” 
that is “being constituted” right as it “goes on”; but we must ask, is it the  same tem-
poralizing in each case, that is, is the temporality of my accessing effort the  very 
same temporality that my effort is aiming to analyze? 
 Here is our  ﬁ rst problem: If we are—that is, if  I am—trying to reach absolutely 
 ﬁ rst-level  temporality, i.e.,  proto- tempor alization,  what is the manner of its  being 
manifest to me? First of all, temporalization is certainly not like a perceptually appear-
ing object. Yet inasmuch as the going-on of any thus characterized duration of either 
a cognitive or a perceptual experience will be temporalized, that dynamic formative 
integration in-the-making will be  discernible . How? Precisely by being discernible  as 
 and  of  that going-on, not by being observable “as a  separate object” itself. 
 This is part of the situation Husserl brie ﬂ y considers in  Ideen I itself, but without 
actually taking it up for analysis. In §38 he points out the difference between the 
 52  A suggestion of this kind occurs, tangentially perhaps, in the passage in Hua III/1 that continues 
from the sentence quoted above from Hua III/1 [4] (with footnote 46). There he is talking about the 
inquiry into “essence,” but the “irreality” of matters inquired into for their essences—which I am 
arguing here are essential matters precisely of “pure phenomenological sense”—remains amenable 
to the same caution he voices there. 
 53  A treatment of the “interworking” of this (as it were) “mechanism” is offered in my 
“Phenomenology in a New Century: What Still Needs to be Done,” in  Analecta Husserliana , Vol. 
105,  Phenomenology and Existentialism in the Twentieth Century, Book Three: Heralding the New 
Enlightenment (Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), 39–79. See in particular 42–52. 
255
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
“perception of something immanent” and the “perception of something transcendent,” 
as the title of that unit puts it. Again, in §42 a different kind of “givenness” characterizes 
the “immanent” object in contrast to that of the “transcendent” object, namely, the dif-
ferences here are (a) that  re ﬂ ective experience, in contrast to  perceptual  experience with 
its perceived object, has the immediacy in unity of the re ﬂ ecting and the re ﬂ ected by 
virtue of a “re ﬂ ective turning of regard” upon itself; and (b) that in this “re ﬂ ective regard” 
there are no “adumbrations [ Abschattungen ]” in the sense of position- or orientation-
varying perspectival differences, as is true for the perceptual object; for “adumbrations” 
require spatial-temporal hyletic “sensation-data” for the differences in concrete sense in 
play therein. Temporality is the intrinsic structural dynamic at the very heart of the 
going-on of experiential consciousness in all its forms, but re ﬂ ective self-givenness 
remains structurally unlike the structural complex of perceptual experience. 
 Still, the question remains about how the constitutively intrinsic character of tem-
porality for all experiential goings-on allows a  manifestness in the re ﬂ ective turn, 
such that it is  therein  that re ﬂ ective regard will have access to not just  one’s own 
going-on as temporalized, but to that  Urzeitigung that is said to be the  “true abso-
lute”  of constitutive genesis and the transcendental heart of subjectivity as such.  
 Second Point: The Lessons of Husserl’s Studies in Reaching 
for the Level of  Urzeitigung : Husserl’s Pursuit of the Question 
 It is the detailed analysis of “proto-temporalization” that Husserl undertakes in the 
third set of his time-investigation manuscripts called the “C-Manuscripts.” However, 
by 1934, when the last of these new manuscripts was produced, Husserl had turned 
over to his assistant Fink the entire effort of synthesizing and developing fully the 
clari ﬁ cation of temporality as the core of transcendental constituting “process,” to 
be done on the basis of Husserl’s total accumulated manuscript work on the matter. 
The account of that task is of course too long to bring in here, and the basics of 
I have laid out elsewhere. 54 Nevertheless, certain methodological and substantive 
points pertaining to the present issue will have to be drawn from Fink’s many still 
preserved hand-written notes on temporality. 
 54  Fink’s beginning to work on editing the Bernau manuscripts of 1917–1918, the  ﬁ rst task Husserl 
gave him as assistant (which normally involved almost daily conversations with Husserl), is likely 
to have been the instigation for Husserl’s beginning the new series of manuscript studies on tem-
porality that continued until 1934. Fink thus worked frontally on the question of the analysis of 
 Urzeitigung in the very years in which the third set of manuscripts was produced. Ultimately 
Fink’s work on this project, which by now had to take into account Husserl’s new C-manuscripts, 
became the composition of an entirely new monograph on temporality. As such, it went beyond 
being simply the analysis of temporalization to offer a whole interpretive and critical drawing of 
methodological and philosophical lessons. Unfortunately, the entire draft has been lost. There is 
good reason to believe that Fink destroyed it himself, in view of his own judgment on it as expressed 
in a note from 1969 to 1971 (EFA 3.2, 441): “Das Manuskript ist 654 Seiten stark – und ‘mißglückt’.” 
For a fuller account, see Chapter 5 of my  Edmund Husserl & Eugen Fink, Beginnings and Ends in 
Phenomenology, 1928–1938 (New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 2004). 
256
R. Bruzina
 At the same time, a number of things are clear in Husserl’s C-Manuscripts them-
selves. For example, quite plainly there is no such thing as getting to pure temporality 
without there being “something” that  undergoes  temporalization. Of course it is not 
an  already “something” that gets “subjected to” temporalization, and thus gets 
transformed from what it already was; rather the  forming-up  of what is  not yet formed 
to what becomes thereby  something formed  is precisely what temporalization is 
about. Yet even this is incorrectly put; for what is in question here as the “to-be-
formed” is not  any kind of “thing”  or “substance.” It is instead the temporalized 
coming-together of a  sense / meaning— in the speci ﬁ cally  phenomenological order—
which can only do so in the “coursing,” the “streaming,” of temporalization. The 
streaming of temporalization, now, is itself in no way a matter of spatial or stuff-like 
distension. It is instead the qualitative coherence and integrative consolidation 
worked precisely by the “protentional” and “retentional” dynamic of constitution 
that takes place in the totally  non-spatial  now—this non-spatial now being the very 
 dimensionality-moment for the “taking place” of this dynamic. The dynamic hap-
pens simply in an utterly  non- spatial  Present: in temporality’s  Living Present. If 
Husserl’s analyses do anything they make this point, whichever of the sets of manu-
scripts one reads. 
 Secondly, in the C-Manuscripts the kinds of sense that comprise not only the 
perceiving of objects, as in  Ideen I —where, as exempli ﬁ ed earlier, Husserl insists 
on the sense-character of the structures he is analyzing—but more importantly  other 
sense-factors that lie “behind” or “below” or “deeper within” the object-centered, 
psychology-based framing of  Ideen I. Speci ﬁ cally, there is the whole dimension of 
the “affective”— Affektivität —as a dimension of it its own, the dimension of 
“feeling” as such, rather than the speci ﬁ c  feelings otherwise known as the emotions, 
that is, the dimension of  das Gefühl as coterminous with living experience [ Erlebnis ]. 
It is astonishing how fundamental a role “feeling” has within the streaming of tem-
poralization, given its sidelining in  Ideen I , but that is precisely one of the cardinal 
lessons of the move beyond object-focused analytic framing. 55 
 For example, the  identity of the I of concrete experience with the I-pole of tem-
porality, a major theme of the C-Manuscripts, is brought about, Husserl  ﬁ nds, by 
“affectivity and activity.” 56 More than this, it is affectivity that can  instigate activity 
 55  For more on this, see my Husserl Circle paper in Paris, June 2009, “Husserl’s ‘Naturalism’ and 
Genetic Phenomenology,” from which the present points are drawn. This paper is now published 
in Vol. 11 of the  New Yearbook of Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy. (I must 
correct a spelling of the pivotal German word  Vergeistigung that appears in this Husserl-Circle 
study [see below Section C on this term]. By some oversight this word’s misspelling as  Vergeist er ung 
had gone uncorrected.) I should also mention that  Affektivität in question here becomes the ques-
tion of the  pathic character of what Fink terms  Vollzugsbewußtsein. 
 56  Examined in a C-manuscript from May 1932 published not in Edmund Husserl,  Späte Text über 
Zeitkonstitution (1925–1934), Die C-Manuskripte, Husserliana Materialien VIII, ed. Dieter 
Lohmar (Dordrecht: Springer, 2006), but as Beilage XX in Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie 
der Intersubjektivität, Dritter Teil: 1929–1935, Husserliana XV, ed. Iso Kern (den Haag: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1973); the text on the issue emphasized (too brie ﬂ y) here is on 355. A supporting passage 
to this is Husserl’s  ﬁ nding in Hua VIII Text Nr. 13, 41–42, from 1931. 
257
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
in the form of an inclinational “feeling of attracting and repelling.” Indeed, the I here 
and its non-I “feeling” “are inseparable,” and this inseparability is such that in the 
complex “the I is a feeling I,” so that to be this way in terms of “feeling [ Fühlen ]” 
is “ the way the I has its basic character [ die Zuständlichkeit des Ich ] before 
any activity, and, if it is active, in the activity.” 57 Husserl then makes a remark about 
one of the fundamental features of many of the manuscript analyses, namely, the 
inability to reach a point in the analysis  before complexities of normal orders have 
begun to shape up—a situational moment that in fact does not seem to be either 
actually given or givable—here speci ﬁ cally in regard to the pivotal role of the 
sensuous material “hyletic”  as itself :
 Of course talk about the I is ultimately determined by the ‘polarization’ of I-action. In 
genetic regressive inquiry we  construct as a beginning the still world-less pre- ﬁ eld 
[ Vorfeld ]  and pre-I [ Vor-Ich ] that is  already a center, but not a “person,”  not to speak of 
a person in the usual sense of the human person. . . . To the streaming present, in the tem-
poralizing-temporalized  ﬂ owing of which all genesis is living genesis, there belongs, now, 
the  constant hyle structure and the  hyle in the characteristics that feeling has . 58 
 What we  ﬁ nd here is a simple “fact-like,”  already-in-play character unavoidably 
typical of genetic factors named at this ultimate level of phenomenological reach. 
Even this, however, amounts to “reaching” it as the “construction” of what  must 
have been , rather than of what is encountered or encounterable in an  actually given 
“some point, somewhere.” Notice that the at the moment  activity  is in play—which 
implies, if not motivation, at least  instigation for movement on the part of an I—the 
 hyletic is in play, here as affective sensuous “materiality.” The hyletic is primordi-
ally “there” at the very outset,  and thereafter, in its fundamental  already making-
sense,  as “felt.” 
 Here I must summarize the remarkable conjunction of manuscript analyses that, 
taken together, work a profound reinterpretive cast upon the way, in their limita-
tions, the “meditations that merely get us up and going [ unserer bloß emporleiten-
den Meditationen ],” i.e., the treatment in  Ideen I, 59 need to be rethought in terms of 
the  relativity of that stage of effort:
 (1)  Through the hyletic in play in the “world-less pre- ﬁ eld[ Vorfeld ]” with the “pre-I 
[ Vor-Ich ] that is already a center, but not a ‘person,’” 60  “in the proto-temporalization 
in which an ego-alien hyletic quasi-world has its ‘pre’-being [ in der eine ichfremde 
 57  Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 79 (from 1931), pp. 351–352 (my emphases in boldface.)  Zuständlichkeit 
is not an ordinary word in German usage.  Zustand generally means state or condition—the con-
crete way something is what it is.  Zuständlich , then, means having to do with the concrete way 
something is what it is constitutively supposed to be. Husserl’s making a noun of the adjective 
suggests the fundamental constitutive state of something, its concretely basic way of being and 
continuing to be itself. 
 58  Hua Mat VIII, the same Text Nr. 79, 352 (again, my emphases in boldface). 
 59  Phrasing from Hua III/1, in the paragraph that begins on [200] and carries on in [201] to end 
Chapter 3—“Noesis and Noema.” 
 60  See the quotation above, on 23, from Text Nr. 79 in Hua Mat VIII (from 1931). 
258
R. Bruzina
hyletische quasi-Welt ihr ‘Vor’-sein hat ]”—which in fact is effectuated “by this 
or that operation in affection and action [ Affektion und Aktion ]”—“the genu-
ine world [ die eigentliche Welt ] comes to be created” in the “multitude” of those 
levels on which the world of our experience has its magni ﬁ cent variety. 61 Yet 
this “operation,” though only imagined (i.e., “constructed”) in its actually inac-
cessible status, is a “proto- ﬂ owing” with a “proto-impressional” element that in 
fact changes and coalesces exactly like the sense in genuine perceptual experi-
ence in an actual world—speci ﬁ cally, for example, with “the change of proto-
impressionality into retentionality” that allows for “total coinciding in the 
content [ Gehalt ]” which is effected as such by the temporalizing dynamic. 62 
That is, in fact it is precisely  sense- like in all respects—except that it is not yet 
endowed with  intentional force, which  ﬁ rst comes into play in actually consti-
tuted perception in the actually constituted world. 
 (2)  This “proto-impressional core [ urimpressionalen Kern ] , ”  63 again, not yet inten-
tional and not yet  perceptual , is also not something one could call “consciousness” 
in its full sense. 64 In its “primordial temporality” it is “a pre-time” (or, otherwise 
rendered: a “‘time’  before’ time,” “an  ‘antecedent’ to time ” ) in the sense that “it is 
not yet any form of objects for the living I in this  ﬂ ow of consciousness.” 65 The 
framework for the conceptuality of analysis here seems to be that of  Ideen I , whereby 
the “beforehand” of this “world-less pre- ﬁ eld[ Vorfeld ]” (see the text referred to in 
#1 right above) with its “ ﬂ ow of consciousness” is not “an object-relevant continuous 
succession[ eine gegenständliche kontinuierliche Sukzession ],” 66 which, even though 
it may have “appearings-of [ Erscheinungen-von ]” something or other, is not the 
exercise of “I-acts” that are object-aimed. 67 Yet if we are talking about temporaliza-
tion in its absolute genetic ultimacy, how could this  not be temporalization?  
 (3)  Despite the stricture that the line of analysis Husserl offers in the manuscript 
material just referred to—on having to respect the difference between (a) the fully 
 61  Portions of text from Hua VIII, Text Nr 79, 250, again the same text as just referred to in a the 
previous footnote. 
 62  See Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 20, from 1931, 81. In more detail, Text Nr. 21 asserts: “Flowing is a 
proto-phenomenon, it is not an explicit following of one thing after another. To the proto-phenom-
enon of  ﬂ owing there belongs a phenomenon of increase (a phenomenon of increasing ‘magni-
tude,’ a graduality), namely of shorter- or longer-lasting or a lasting that just keeps going on 
longer.” This is clearly nothing less than temporalization, and speci ﬁ cally “die lebendige 
Gegenwart.” (Hua Mat VIII, 93). 
 63  This  ﬁ rst is from Hua Mat VIII, Text nr. 21 (1930), 99. 
 64  This quali ﬁ cation is well expressed in Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 24 (1930), 112–13. 
 65  Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 62, 269. This phrase in brackets is my gloss, which in view of the rest of 
the sentence seems the preferable reading. 
 66  The phrasings in this half up to this point here in this paragraph are from Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 
62, 269 (1934). 
 67  These quali ﬁ cations are from Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 24, 112, the same text as referred in note 
42 just above. 
259
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
constituted intentional-experiential life in the world that is our everyday situation, 
and (b) that which would be the  antecedent process-like interplay of factors and 
elements—Husserl allows himself extraordinary latitude for indicating what is 
to be identi ﬁ ed in that antecedent play of components that constitutively  bring 
about and continually  support our full- ﬂ edged life in the world as  intrinsic to it. 
Husserl passes from the proto-hyletic and proto-impressional—the proto-tem-
poralization, the “pre- ﬁ eld” and the “pre-I”—to what we would be (and he 
allows to be)  subsequent factors and elements—mainly  nature itself and the 
 human body; and yet these subsequent factors and elements, as “correlative” to 
the antecedent factors, nonetheless have a special relevance to the “material 
proto-core” that grants them a “primordiality” of their own. Basically here is 
where nature itself and the human body pertain to the “apprehension” of nature 
“as spatio-temporal nature” and of space “ in orientation around my living 
body [ Leib ] and its exceptional way of appearing.” 68 This, however, increases 
the paradox of illustrating the unconditioned antecedent in terms of the there-
with conditioned resultant. Can this be at all legitimate? 
 (4)  Husserl offers a way of resolving this: He has to admit that, in the “regressive 
inquiry” that is under way here, there is “an identi ﬁ cation produced” that “creates 
object-status [ Gegenständlichkeit schafft ]” for what actually, “as pre-being,” 69 is 
“non- experienceable and non-sayable ” (my boldface). What we are doing, 
then, is converting it— as it were— into an  actual object-like something in order 
to imagine it, delineate it, and differentiate it from other matters. It is, in 
Husserl’s own words, “exhibited” by being “onti ﬁ ed.” 70 
 Yet the fact remains that this effort with its “onti ﬁ cation” amounts to the 
attempt to display the constitutive “source” of the structures that make for the 
de ﬁ niteness and holding-value [ Geltung , usually rendered “validity”]  in terms 
of, and indeed  as intrinsically (seemingly!) subject to, the very conditions that 
determine constitutive  products, the very structures and units that  result from 
transcendental constitutive originative “agency” as such. (In effect, Husserl 
implied something of this kind in his very  ﬁ rst time-consciousness analyses, 
and it should be no surprise that it occurs to him again in his last; and that realization 
is far more in play there.) 71 
 (5)  In Husserl’s phenomenological workshop there had been a vigorous display of 
the dif ﬁ culty evident at this point in this  ﬁ nal set of Husserl’s time-analyses, on 
 68  Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 23 (1930), 110–12. 
 69  Here again, “‘before’-being” could be the rendering. 
 70  Again from Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 62, 269. Not accidental is the parallel here to Fink’s point in 
 VI. Cartesianische Meditation, Teil 1 Die Idee einer transzendentalen Methodenlehre (see note 10, 
in the  ﬁ rst part of the present paper), 85–86;  Sixth Meditation, 76. See also Husserl’s marginal 
remark no. 257 in this document. 
 71  See Edmund Husserl,  Zur  Phänomenologie  des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917), 
Husserliana X, ed. Rudolf Boehm (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), §36: “Für all das fehlen 
uns die Namen,” despite the fact he had just provided a description for them. 
260
R. Bruzina
the very issue of supposed access to that which is in principle beyond the reach 
of the capacities of intuitional cognitive accession; and this is the transcendental 
methodological critique that Eugen Fink provided Husserl in writing in the 
summer of 1932. Moreover, Fink’s notes on the principles of his “transcendental 
 Methodenlehre” antedate 1932 by several years, back to his  ﬁ rst year of work 
with Husserl beginning in the fall of 1928. In addition, the  ﬁ rst formally written 
indication of this line of thinking afforded Husserl lies in sketch-like form in 
the remarkable “Layout for Edmund Husserl’s ‘System of Phenomenological 
Philosophy’ (August 13, 1930),” which opens the second volume of the edition 
in Husserlian Dokumente of the “VI. Cartesianische Meditation.” 72 Unfortunately, 
there is no room here to take up this “Layout” adequately; all that I can present 
are very summary points on some of the basic issues in how Husserl’s analysis 
of  Urzeitungung works. 
 Elements for the Radical Interpretive Revision in Pursuing 
the Question of Proto-Constitution and Proto-Temporalization 
 (1)  Phenomenology as regressive (or, perhaps preferably: regressional) analysis 73 : 
 Husserl had long and regularly spoken of phenomenology as “regressing,” that 
is, as working from the constitut ed back to the constitut ing . This, of course, is 
the whole point of the “ re -duction”: to move from what is already constituted 
by transcendental sources to the sources that “do” that transcendental constituting—
except that to think of this as “doing” is to impose on the trans-mundane 
what is speci ﬁ cally mundane, namely, the doing of an action in temporal and/
or spatial horizontal settings. What kind of a doing, then, is a  transcendental 
“doing”? 
 It is in regard to this that Fink has some insightful things to say. To begin 
with, a simply descriptive observation, namely, that the whole investigational 
method of  positively descriptive phenomenology, in being  regressive , is that it 
“lays back” onto the transcendental the characterizing terms of that which is 
originated transcendentally from it; it is a  rücklegende method—“retro-applica-
tion [ Rücklage ].” 74 Fink, however, pushes this idea to a further level of interpre-
tation, namely, by insisting that the non-accessibility  in se of the originating 
makes the accessibility lie precisely  in the originated as such. The character of the 
constitutively originat ing is only discernible precisely  as the very  constituted ness 
 72  Eugen Fink,  VI. Cartesianische Meditation, Teil 2 Ergänzungsband, Hua Dok II/2, 3–9: 
“Disposition zu ‚System der phänomenologischen Philosophie‘ von Edmund Husserl (13. August 
1930).” 
 73  From Section 2, “Regressive Phänomenologie,” subsection E: “MethodischeRe ﬂ exionen,” in 
Fink’s “Layout [ Disposition ]”:  VI. Cartesianische Meditation, Hua Dok II/2, 7. 
 74  The way this is treated in  Edmund Husserl & Eugen Fink can easily be found by searching 
“retro-application” in the index. 
261
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
of the originat ed . The paradoxical positivity of this is nicely expressed in 
two notes of Fink’s from late 1928 or the  ﬁ rst half of 1929 (my boldface for 
emphasis):
 “Absolute” being is not in any way a being that would be found alongside of or outside that-
which-is. Rather it is only accessible at all from the ontical as a point of departure. It is, in 
a certain way,  the ontical itself, but inquired into so radically that it is the ontical, in a 
certain way, before its  e ἶ n a i . —The relation of “the absolute” to the ontical we shall call 
the “origin.”  “Origin” is not an intra-worldly beginning but  is seen in an intra-worldly 
way always  according to  that of which it is precisely the origin . “Origin” has an anteced-
ency  t ῇ  f ὺ s e i [by nature], and not  p r ὸ V  ἡ m ᾶ V [to us]. 75 
 Again, from the same folder of notes:
 Genetic clari ﬁ cation leads into self-temporalizing time, and so is  not a regress into the 
intra-temporal past. Genesis is the temporalization of time. In this fundamental problem of 
the temporalization of time, in this proto-happening that  ﬁ rst makes possible all happening, is 
revealed the puzzling phenomenon of “retro-application.” The temporalization of time is 
not a “happening” any more than it “is,” but it can be philosophically described  only by 
retro-applying [to it]  what is made possible by it (intra-temporality) . 76 
 (2)  Phenomenology as integratively positive, and forward looking : 77 
 Among a richness of other points, Fink writes this in key-word style:
 Progressive analysis as setting one’s aim on the  perfectivity [ Perfektivität ] of the transcen-
dental. Regressive analysis as analysis that takes apart[ Abbau-Analyse ]; progressive analy-
sis as analysis that puts together [ Aufbau-Analyse ]. 78 
 Here is what is implied in this brief proposal:
As already pointed out earlier, the effect of the limitation in the regressive move 
from the givenness of the already constituted to the constituting, in the inquiry into 
proto-temporalization, was one of Fink’s main preoccupations from the very begin-
ning of his work with Husserl, and these lines on Perfektivität pertain precisely to that. 
However, my understanding of the point of this term is something that I do not  ﬁ nd 
actually spelled out by Fink in his notes. The one mention of Perfektivität there that, 
 75  Eugen Fink,  Phänomenologische Werkstatt, Eugen Fink Gesamtausgabe, 3/1:  Teilband 1: Die 
Doktorarbeit und erste Assistenzjahre bei Husserl, ed. Ronald Bruzina (Freiburg: Verlag Karl 
Alber, 2006), Z-IV 112b, 269. 
 76  Op. cit., Z-IV 10a, 213–14 (my addition in brackets). 
 77  From Fink’s “Layout [ Disposition ]”:  VI. Cartesianische Meditation, Hua Dok II/2, Section 3, 
“Progressive Phänomenologie,” subsection A “Das methodische Problem,” (a), 7. 
 78  VI CM, Hua Dok, II/2, 7. Rather than the overused Latinate words, “deconstruct” and “con-
struct,” a more colloquially based rendering is adopted here (one could also say “take down” and 
“build up”). The general idea is that of the difference between seeing something in terms of dis-
tinct components and seeing it in terms of integrative coherence and meaning. One of Fink’s 
striking watchwords throughout his research notes is  Integration, a task regularly spoken of by 
Husserl but largely not pursued thoroughly enough in terms of the problematic depth to which 
phenomenological investigation, on its own principles, had to reach, as the whole of this section 
3 on “Progressive Phänomenologie” indicates. The possibilities and demands in Fink’s bare-
bones outline suggests what all would remain to be done when Husserl’s corpus of writings came 
to a close with his death.  
262
R. Bruzina
no more than a hint, I totally overlooked in my reading of the C-Manuscripts, 
suddenly struck me as exemplifying what this term basically signi ﬁ es 79 . It is a 
simple point: the word Perfektivität refers to a grammatical form, the perfect tense 
(sometimes called the present perfect) in the conjugation of verbs, which in German 
technical usage is das Perfekt (or Perfektum). The verbal tense indicates an action 
whose operation has already done its work, has as of now carried through its perfor-
mance. That state of already completion is Perfektivität.
  In the context of the analysis of  Urzeitigung , then, this is the feature of  originative “agency” 
as  always already “having done its work,” and always  before we begin phenomenology 
(otherwise, indeed, we could not “work back” to its “beginnings”).That is, before we begin 
phenomenology the  Perfektivität of constitution, the constitution that enables our life now 
to be going on—whether as experiential in the world, or in the highest abstractions of con-
centrated thought—is its  having always already set things up in their going-on; and we 
 literally can never  ﬁ nd ourselves, the constituted, in a state of affairs  before its being thus in 
operation in our basic capabilities, in our full-scale experiential being in the fully formed 
horizons of the world. 
 (3)  Now, this is precisely the situation that we  ﬁ nd repeatedly described by Husserl 
as he tries to plumb “the depths” for the operations antecedent to our already 
constituted experiential living; for there we continually come upon things 
 always already set up in their basic compositional structure. The  very begin-
ning, before any such compositional completeness, is never there to be found. 
Basic elements are always found already in play,  or are  “envisioned” as  not 
quite yet put together  in full. Yet even in this case, all is  already ready for the 
“play” to begin: the elements are conceived as all waiting “in wings,” so to 
speak, fully determined and apt for their roles and about to be brought onto the 
scene to play them out for the onlookers. 
 To put it another way, however, we have to admit that we do not actually  ﬁ nd a 
genuine beginning; we have to  construct it to make it a something de ﬁ nite—or 
“reconstruct” it (to use another word Husserl also uses in the C-Manuscripts) 80 —in 
such a way that we suppose the non-assemblage of the elements we already know, 
and then we  posit the actual assembling, precisely in some form of what we already 
know as the “always-already-having-been-set-up” so as “to-be-going-on-now.” At 
 ﬁ rst this “already going-on” may well be envisioned without a fully structurally and 
actively  ﬁ lled-out human person—that is, without the object-focused engagement 
with an already set-up surrounding milieu such as is in the forefront of  Ideen I , 81 
even while the situation is imagined as it would be  before an actual experience with 
that object-focus in play. Yet, again, all the elements analyzed in  Ideen I  as belonging 
 79  It should be said that for the native speaker of German, while in everyday situations—say, in 
arranging for a convenient time for some kind of event—one could easily express satisfaction by 
saying “Perfekt!” nonetheless, in a theoretical discussion of  Perfekt (such as in Heidegger’s  Sein 
und Zeit, (Tübingen, 1963, 85)), the grammatical connotation would be obvious and its relevance 
understood. Fink’s one mention of  Perfektivität is in notebook OH-II, manuscript page 53, which 
will be in  Phänomenologische Werkstatt 3.3. 
 80  See for example Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 80, 357. 
 81  See the situations represented in section 2, p. 250 above. 
263
15  Ideen I and Eugen Fink’s Critical Contribution
to it are not actually “ coming to be”; they are already expected as fully  “ready” to be 
put into play. We do not see and cannot  ﬁ nd a  genuine genesis. We envision, again, 
an assembling of (at least virtually) pre-formed parts, not an  absolute origination . 
 A  true genesis phenomenologically speaking begins not with any such  parts , but 
with the dynamic of  temporalization modulating and integrating the “constituents” 
precisely  as senses in the  ﬂ ow of protentional-retentional diversity-in-integration 
such that the integration is ipso facto  temporally, in ﬂ ectedly realized. It is  this factor, 
precisely as  integrative and making for the unity of the supposedly already  pre-
uni ﬁ cation component parts, this integrative uni ﬁ cation precisely  as temporal, that 
is the point of the analysis; and that is what is here  perfect (perfekt). It is this 
 integratum has its central role at the heart of the experiential both noetically and 
noematically, as the entirely coincident “of-” and “to-” in experiential and phenom-
enological  intending and  appearing. 
 The Task That Remains 
 With this,  new ways are opened up for reinterpreting and rephrasing phenomeno-
logical elements of transcendental constitution and how it genetically proceeds as 
“always-already” under way. This, however, cannot be taken up now. 82 A further 
matter cannot go unmentioned as well, namely, the way the hyletic plays the role of 
the “proto-natural” in the temporalized multi-phased building up of sense. One 
striking example of this is Text Nr. 23 (from 1930). 83  Here “the proto-hyletic core” 
as it functions in “the natural  ﬁ eld of perception”—which is of course the site of its 
role in  Ideen I and the site most familiar and basic for us as re ﬂ ecting humans—is 
shown in a “a new mode” of “apprehensional take [ Auffassung ],” namely, “for the 
perception of the  hylē of the natural [ für die Wahrnehmung der naturalen Hylē ] .” 
Let me quote a few lines in their entirety for the remarkable descriptions they offer:
 “Nature” is the core, the matter (hylē) of the world as experienced , a core that takes on 
and, in consciousness of the world,  already antecedently has “spiritualization 
[ Vergeistigung ]:” but objective  nature is not constituted simply on the basis of the uni-
tary hyle, but rather the primordial core is  ﬁ rst constituted through which  the sense of 
nature for me is constituted on the  ﬁ rst level . 84 
 82  For a preliminary representation of some of this innovative reconception that Fink considers, see 
my  Edmund Husserl & Eugen Fink , in particular in Chapter 5 “Fundamental Thematics II: Time,” 
section5.1.2.3.3, 276–80. Here too (speci ﬁ cally on 277) “ ﬁ eld-intentionality” is mentioned, again 
with further places locatable via the index. 
 83  Hua Mat VIII, 111–12. Before the passage quoted here, Husserl goes through several pages of 
“regression” from the familiar—perceptual objects in the world—to the unfamiliar—the proto-
temporalized constitution of sense. The present passage, however, is not simply a further stage in 
a unilinear sequence, but rather a deepening  redoing, with further development, of those previous 
analyses in this manuscript. 
 84  Op. cit, 111. 
264
R. Bruzina
 The “nature” talked about here is certainly the sense of nature in its  originative 
cast:  not in the mode of naturalistic physical science, but one intrinsic to what he 
might have called “life-world” experience. Equally signi ﬁ cant, and pivotal here, is 
the “spiritualization” [ Vergeistigung ] (which could also be rendered “mentalization”), 
a term Husserl puts in quotation marks to suggest its taking a new sense, namely, 
from the context of genetic ultimacy. The question is, what is this  Vergeistigung, 
especially in that this  has already been done  in that this hyletic “core” is  already in 
play  in the temporalization of experience? And we see here that the materially 
hyletic is intrinsic to the very  capacity of sense to function as the heart of both expe-
riential and theoretical intelligence. Intrinsic as well to this capacity of sense is that 
it comprises, in the same function, the spectrum of modalities wherein the sense of 
the natural is also the spectrum of the ways in which perceptually experiential being 
 appears —i.e., in the character as fundamentally  “irreal” precisely as  phenomena . 
 What we have here is a transformation that—unlike for example the treatment in 
 Ideen II where the  Vergeistigung  seems to be the endowing, from “higher up” 
(ultimately by “spirit”), of bodily material factors with the meaning-character of 
 sense —places that operation of  “Vergeistigung” right “at the bottom” of the tempo-
ralized sense of the senses. 85 Here the  Vergeistigung —and its material (“hyletic”) 
character—seem  indigenous to temporalization as such from the very beginning. 
 This, however, in turn means that in the C-Manuscript studies the metaphysical 
distinction, and any absolute dichotomy, between  Natur and  Geist is undercut right 
at the core of the phenomenology of  Sinn  in  Urzeitigung , in the very play and interplay 
that makes perception to be of natural reality in horizonalities of the world. Indeed, 
this undercutting is shown further by other texts of the C-Manuscripts—again, 
something space does not us to into here. 86 
 To draw to a close, then, I am offering here a set of considerations that show 
Husserl’s investigational project, both in the manuscripts and in his own published 
writings, to be  intrinsically , and not simply by accidents of individual human foi-
bles, to require reconsidering and reinterpretation.  Ideen I  is noteworthy as calling 
for just that. It is thus inescapably preliminary and non- ﬁ nal precisely in its 
achievements; for therein  Ideen I gives us the  ﬁ rst-stage results that enable return to 
beginnings so that we may reach for the ultimates to which it offers the opening. 
 85  See, for example, Hua IV, §56 h, 236–41. There the terms are  beseelen and  begeisten (the latter 
quite distinct from  begeiste rn, which means “to  ﬁ ll with delight or enthusiasm”). 
 86  See for example, Hua Mat VIII, Text Nr. 23, 111–12, also important in my 2009 Husserl Circle 
paper. (See note 54 above.) 
265
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_16, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 C’est sans doute Husserl qui est à l’origine de mes écrits. 
 —Levinas 
 Introduction 
 As with others, Emmanuel Levinas was drawn to Freiburg—“the city of phenome-
nology, small, tidy, and pretty”—in 1928, at the age of 22, by the spell of discovering 
“more than a new theory,” but a “new ideal for life, a new page in history, almost a 
new religion.” 1 Amidst a parting of ways between Husserl and Heidegger, Levinas 
began to fashion an original form of thinking that, despite evident markers of its 
genesis, phenomenological and otherwise, appears to have alighted from nowhere. 
As Levinas repeatedly stressed in his writings on Husserl and Heidegger, the phe-
nomenological movement provoked an unparalleled  liberation of thinking, the 
signi ﬁ cance and direction of which still remained open. Levinas was not alone in 
reacting to phenomenology with such a heightened sense of promise. 2 Nor was he 
alone in de ﬁ ning his own philosophical Odyssey as an over-coming and radicaliza-
tion of phenomenology, as revealing its inherent limitations while also ful ﬁ lling its 
 N.  de  Warren (*)
 Institute of Philosophy ,  University of Leuven ,  Leuven ,  Belgium 
e-mail:  Nicolas.deWarren@hiw.kuleuven.be 
 Chapter 16 
 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy 
of Light and Reason 
 Nicolas  de  Warren   
 1  Emmanuel Levinas, “Fribourg, Husserl et la phénoménologie,”  Revue d’Allemagne et des pays de 
langue allemande 5/43 (May 1931): 403. 
 2  Edith Stein: “I was twenty-one and all excited over everything that was going to happen to me. 
Dear old Göttingen! I think only people who were between 1905 and 1914, in the brief  ﬂ owering 
of the Göttingen School of phenomenology, can appreciate what that name contains for us.” Quoted 
in Alasdair Macintyre,  Edith Stein: A Philosophical Prologue, 1913–1922 (Rowman and Little ﬁ eld: 
London, 2005), 20. 
266
N. de Warren
inner meaning. Years before Levinas reached Freiburg, the earliest gathering of students 
around Husserl in Göttingen (Reinach, Hering, Conrad-Martius, Stein) were infused 
with a comparable vitality in reaction to the  Logische Untersuchungen . In Levinas’s 
case, however, assessing the signi ﬁ cance of Husserlian phenomenology for the for-
mation of his thinking is not as easily spelled out, as it does not take its bearings from 
familiar points of reference, such as the question of realism and idealism, much 
debated among Husserl’s Göttingen students, for example. Indeed, it should ring 
strange to our ears, in light of which we might smile approvingly without genuine 
conviction, to read Levinas’s Freiburg testimonial. Who today could speak of 
Husserl’s phenomenological thinking as more than a theory, as opening nothing less 
than a “new ideal for life, a new page in history, almost a new religion”? 
 Levinas’s engagement with Husserl can be plotted along two axes. Along a  ﬁ rst 
axis, Levinas was an unsurpassed interpreter of Husserl: he published a thesis on 
Husserl’s conception of intuition; wrote a lengthy review of the  Ideen ; co-translated 
the  Méditations cartésiennes ; and authored articles on signi ﬁ cant themes in Husserl’s 
thinking. 3 These writings cover a broad spectrum of genres: academic dissertation 
and monograph; review essay; introductory survey; translation; and interpretative 
essay. Along a second axis, Levinas integrated basic impulses within phenomenol-
ogy, often in trans ﬁ gured form, into the fabric of his mature thinking. Against the 
simplistic view that Levinas progressively abandoned interest in Husserlian phe-
nomenology, Levinas in fact penned some his most original essays on Husserl while 
 ﬁ nishing his  ﬁ rst major work,  Totalité et In ﬁ ni —a work in gestation since at least 
the 1940s. In writings on the  ﬁ rst axis, Levinas reads Husserl in the manner of critical 
exposition; and yet, one already discerns the lineaments of Levinas’s own nascent 
thinking  within these texts explicitly dedicated to readings of Husserl. In writings 
on the second axis, one routinely discovers indices of a profound and patient 
absorption of Husserlian themes. 4 Perhaps most signi ﬁ cantly, Levinas incorporates 
the Husserlian imperative “back to the things themselves” in his uncompromising 
recourse to the irreducible experience of the Other, understood, however, in decidedly 
“non-phenomenological” terms, that is, without recourse to light and reason. The 
face of the Other does not present any evidence of the Other’s presence, but on the 
contrary, for Levinas, offers the plentitude of an absence that I am called to witness, 
and to which I am beholden, held hostage. Taken together, these two axes orches-
trate an exposition  and exposure of Husserl’s thinking: a masterful exposition from 
the inside and a challenging exposure to an outside. 
 This dual manner of exposition and exposure was present from the beginning of 
Levinas’s engagement with Husserl. Levinas’s review of Husserl’s  Ideen represents 
his  ﬁ rst philosophical publication, appearing one year prior to the 1930 publication 
of his thesis,  Théorie de l’intuition dans la phénoménologie de Husserl. 5 At  ﬁ rst 
 3  Throughout this paper, I shall refer to  Ideen I simply as “ Ideen .” 
 4  Cf. Yasuhiko Murakami,  Lévinas phénoménologue (Jérôme Millon: Grenoble, 2002). 
 5  “Sur les ‘Ideen’ de M. E. Husserl,”  Revue philosophique de la France et de l’Etranger CVII/3–4 
(March–April, 1929): 230–65; hereafter HI. 
267
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
glance, Levinas’s review appears philosophically unremarkable, as we might expect 
of the due diligence required of a book review in which the work, and not the 
reviewer himself, is the primary subject of consideration. In Adriaan Peperzak’s 
estimation, “a survey of his [ Levinas’s ] own evolution with regard to Husserl can 
start from Levinas’s dissertation,” and so forgo a treatment of Levinas’s review of 
the  Ideen , since the latter is merely deemed “a faithful exposition without any criti-
cism.” 6 While Levinas indeed “faithfully” presents the structure and argument of the 
 Ideen  to his French-speaking audience (Paul Ricoeur’s translation of the  Ideen 
would only appear in 1950), traces of a more profound germination of thought are 
nonetheless discernible, appearing as protentional contours , as it were, hinting 
towards central pre-occupations of Levinas’s thinking to come. In Levinas’s review, 
subtle in ﬂ ections that would have appeared insigni ﬁ cant at the time of publication 
come to appear, in hindsight, from the vantage point of Levinas’s mature thinking, 
as foreshadowing it. More signi ﬁ cantly, Levinas’s entry into philosophical visibility 
 via a review of the  Ideen (irrespective of its modesty as a “faithful” piece) can be 
seen as symbolic of the signi ﬁ cance of Husserlian phenomenology for his thinking 
in general, and of the  Ideen in particular. 
 Despite its austere framework, daunting vocabulary, and demanding opening 
section, Levinas insists that the  Ideen does not contain a  ﬁ nished system of thought. 
On the contrary, the  Ideen presents an emerging constellation into which we are 
asked to enter; it constitutes an  invitation to think. Within this newly forged constel-
lation, traditional philosophical questions are posed anew and approached from 
fresh perspectives with the over-arching intent of rendering them “susceptible to 
solution” (HI, 231). Under the call “back to things themselves,” phenomenological 
analysis is not justly a method of descriptive analysis or an innovative manner of 
re-stating traditional philosophical questions. More stridently, Husserl’s transcen-
dental phenomenology is committed to the idea that man can only meaningfully 
pose problems that man himself can solve. Without, however, disregarding paradox 
and complexity as they arise, without, in other words, a self-directed critical impulse, 
Husserl’s thinking manifests a con ﬁ dence in rationality, and thus responds to the 
deepest motivations for philosophical thinking, which, in its original Platonic form, 
can be characterized as the liberation of human existence from naiveté through the 
awakening of reason and its radical pursuit of insight. This ful ﬁ llment of the “secret 
desire of Western philosophy,” as Husserl characterized the meaning of the  Ideen , 
would resonate profoundly in Levinas’s thinking, and yet would ultimately be 
revealed by Levinas as possessing an ambiguous meaning: the violence of light. 
As I shall presently argue, Husserl’s  Ideen delivers to Levinas a paradigmatic con-
ception of the identity of reason and being that comes to steer his critique of totality 
and ontology, while at the same time signaling an horizon “otherwise than essence 
and beyond being” on the contours of Husserl’s own conception of transcendental 
subjectivity. Husserl’s  Ideen exposes in a historically de ﬁ nitive fashion the truth of 
 6  Adriaan Peperzak,  Beyond: The Philosophy of Emmanuel Levinas (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1997), 39. 
268
N. de Warren
idealism: “Reason is alone. And in this sense knowledge never encounters anything 
truly other in the world.” 7 Any account of the evolution of Levinas’s thinking must 
thus begin with Levinas’s review of Husserl’s  Ideen , not despite its philosophical 
modesty, but precisely because of it—as I hope to demonstrate in this essay. 
 The Transcendental Turn of the  Ideen 
 The  ﬁ rst volume of the  Ideen (1913) represented a contentious turning point in the 
development of Husserl’s phenomenological thinking. Among a number of Husserl’s 
students, the  Ideen ’s transcendental turn was judged as betraying the gains of the 
 Logische Untersuchungen and as succumbing to the institutional sway of Neo-
Kantianism. As Edith Stein recalled: “The main reason the  Logische Untersuchungen 
had made such an impact was that they seemed to mark a radical break with critical 
idealism, both of the Kantian and neo-Kantian types … In  Ideen , however, a number 
of expressions cropped up which seemed to indicate a reversion to idealism on the 
part of the author. Nothing he [ Husserl ] said to us by way of explanation was able 
to allay our suspicions … His old Göttingen students could not support him in this 
move, to his regret and theirs.” 8 While Paul Natorp welcomed the transcendental 
aspiration of the  Ideen into the ranks of Neo-Kantianism, Heidegger submitted its 
key theses to scrutiny in his Marburg lecture courses, reserving his most strident 
critique for the Master’s dogmatic commitment to the primacy of theoretical knowl-
edge and scienti ﬁ c certitude. 
 Although removed from the  ﬁ rst generations of Husserl’s students, Levinas’s 
framing of the  Ideen shares, in an important sense, the primacy of ontological con-
cerns that de ﬁ ned the enthusiastic reception of the  Logische Untersuchungen among 
Lask, Heidegger and Husserl’s Göttingen followers. As Conrad-Martius notes: the 
“newly-won insight into the intellectual attainability of Being in all of its possible 
con ﬁ gurations united us.” 9 Edith Stein equally considered the liberating effect of 
Husserl’s  Logische Untersuchungen in terms of its rehabilitation of ontology (along 
with implied religious signi ﬁ cance), encoded (and perhaps garbled, as Heidegger 
perceptively charged) in the language of realism. Husserl’s  Logische Untersuchungen 
facilitated the return of the “real” and “concreteness” into philosophical re ﬂ ection 
against the orthodoxy of Kantian idealism. In surveying these expressions of enthu-
siasm for Husserl’s breakthrough work, notable is the refrain of the experience of 
 liberation —understood as the liberation from abstraction and concepts—and the 
dawn of a new horizon of thinking based on intuition. This vein of interpretation 
 7  Emmanuel Levinas,  Time and the Other , trans. R. Cohen (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 
1987), 68. 
 8  Quoted in Alasdair Macintyre,  Edith Stein: A Philosophical Prologue, 1913–1922 (London: 
Rowman and Little ﬁ eld, 2005), 18. 
 9  Quoted in Alasdair Macintyre,  Edith Stein: A Philosophical Prologue , 15. 
269
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
surfaces prominently in Levinas’s thesis, with the Heideggerian quali ﬁ cation that 
Husserl’s commitment to the primacy of theory forfeits the genuine meaning of this 
liberation of “being”: the “objective” intentionality of knowledge, exempli ﬁ ed in 
perceptual consciousness, constricts the manifestation of beings to the demand of 
certitude and complete self-presence. 
 I am here not so much concerned in critically assessing whether Husserl’s  Logische 
Untersuchungen , and, in particular, the ontologically charged Sixth Investigation, 
does address, even in missing it, as Heidegger provocatively claimed, “the problem 
of being.” In drawing attention to this ontological promise of Husserl’s  Logische 
Untersuchungen , my point instead is to draw attention to a crucial difference between 
Levinas’s reaction to Husserl’s  Ideen  and his fellow phenomenological enthusiasts, 
one that is crucial for a proper assessment of his assessment of the  Ideen . From the 
vantage point of Husserl’s Göttingen students, (but also from Heidegger’s, for different 
reasons), a principal fault with the transcendental turn of the  Ideen consisted in its 
embrace of idealism. Seen in this manner, the idealism of the  Ideen represents a 
reversal of the primacy of ontology heralded in the  Logische Untersuchungen . 
Levinas does share this common and critical perception of the  Ideen as representing 
a form of idealism; and yet, whereas Husserl’s Göttingen students unambiguously 
perceived this transgression of the ontological orientation of the  Logische 
Untersuchungen as a reversal, Levinas discerns a more subtle meaning that fore-
closes any return to the so-called ontological realism of the  Logische Untersuchungen 
(as advocated by Husserl’s Göttingen students and the Munich School). Quietly 
whispered in his review of the  Ideen , and more explicitly formulated in his later essay 
“Intentionality and Sensation,” the other truth, as it were, of Husserl’s transcendental 
idealism consists in its supreme effort to pry open a space of thinking “beyond essence 
and otherwise than being.” 10  This, we might say, is the true secret of transcendental 
idealism: it heralds the possibility of a fundamental  rupture with the primacy of 
ontology and the Parmenidean identity of thinking and being. 
 Whatever the merits of the passionate reactions provoked by the  Ideen , it is clear 
that Husserl considered the transcendental expansion of phenomenology as a neces-
sary consequence to the breakthrough of the  Logische Untersuchungen . Throughout 
his life, Husserl continually insisted on the centrality of transcendental idealism for 
his phenomenological enterprise, even if its precise contours and exact content 
remained in need of systematic realization and re ﬁ nement. This untiring commit-
ment to  transcendental phenomenology did not preclude an innovative exploration 
of the meaning and challenge of transcendental idealism. On the contrary, Husserl’s 
writings contain a wide variety of transcendental argumentation, from formal proofs 
to the sophisticated methodological centerpiece of the phenomenological and tran-
scendental reductions. More importantly, Husserl conceived of the  Ideen as an 
introduction to philosophy  as such , on the basis of his robust identi ﬁ cation of tran-
scendental idealism with the only possible rigorous form of philosophical thinking. 
 10  Cf. “Intentionalité et sensation,” in  En découvrant l’existence avec Husserl et Heidegger (Paris: 
Vrin, 1988), 145–164. 
270
N. de Warren
In its phenomenological identity, transcendental idealism represents nothing less 
than the ful ﬁ llment of the historical  telos of rationality, although, in truth, the full 
scope of Husserl’s historical conception of Western reason would only  ﬁ nd its 
mature expression in his later writings. As evident from the reactions it produced, 
and still produces, the  Ideen represents a philosophical provocation: genuine 
philosophy is only possible as transcendental phenomenology. 
 The centrality of the problem of reason pervades Husserl’s thinking from the 
 Logische Untersuchungen through the  Ideen to the  Krisis . As Husserl writes in the 
 Krisis : “Thus philosophy is nothing other than rationalism through and through, 
but it is a rationalism differentiated within itself according to the different stages of 
the movement of intention and ful ﬁ llment; it is  ratio in the constant movement of 
self-elucidation ( Selbsterhellung ) begun with the  ﬁ rst breakthrough of philosophy 
into mankind, whose innate reason was previously in a state of concealment 
( Verschlossenheit ), of nocturnal obscurity” (Hua VI, 273). Husserl’s thinking 
exhibits in its own internal progression this dynamic of reason’s progressive self-
illumination and self-discovery. 11 One might even characterize the development 
from the  Logische Untersuchungen  to the  Ideen  as recapitulating the historical 
development (mapped by Husserl in his lecture course  Erste Philosophie ) from the 
original Greek  Durchbruch  of the idea of philosophy in Plato to the  Einbruch of 
the transcendental attitude in Descartes, and as further developed in Kant. The 
 Logische Untersuchungen , famously:  ein Werk des Durchbruchs . The  Ideen , con-
troversially:  ein Werk des Einbruchs —one could add. Even if the  Logische 
Untersuchungen lacks the transcendental framework of the  Ideen (noetic-noematic 
conception of intentionality, the method of reduction, transcendental subjectivity, 
etc.), its ambition to provide a fundamental clari ﬁ cation of knowledge is equally 
motivated by the urgency of articulating the meaning of rationality and the ratio-
nality of meaning against various de ﬂ ations of reason: logicism, psychologism, 
evolution, etc. 12  Although it would be too narrow to ascribe a response to the problem 
of skepticism as the primary motivation for Husserl’s transcendental enterprise 
 as a whole (different currents within his enterprise respond to different motiva-
tions), when writ large as a moniker for the broader problem of reason (i.e., not 
simply the intelligibility of the world but what we might dub the intelligibility of 
intelligibility), then, indeed, since its Platonic origin, the scandal of philosophy 
consists in the inability to respond conclusively to the “immorality of skepticism” 
(Hua VII, 57). In other words: the inability to articulate the rationality of the real, 
or alternatively formulated, the intelligibility of human experience, as rendered 
transparent through thinking (about) itself. In his own manner, Husserl’s transcen-
dental phenomenology encapsulates the Hegelian formula: the real is the rational, 
the rational is the real—a formula echoed in the  ﬁ nal Part of the  Ideen , “Vernunft 
und Wirklichkeit,” albeit, in a decidedly un-Hegelian register.  
 11  Cf. André de Muralt,  The Idea of Phenomenology: Husserlian Exemplarism , trans. G. Breckon 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1988). 
 12  Cf. James Dodd,  Crisis and Re ﬂ ection (Dordrecht: Springer, 2004). 
271
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
 The Problem of Reason 
 This centrality of the problem of reason is apparent from the  ﬁ rst Part of the  Ideen , 
“Wesen und Wesenserkenntnis.” Although Levinas provides a thumbnail sketch of 
this opening section in his review essay, it is nonetheless embroidered with sugges-
tive in ﬂ ections. For Husserl, a scienti ﬁ c discipline is de ﬁ ned as a body of eidetic 
knowledge, whereby an essence, or  eidos , is understood as an ensemble of predi-
cates belonging to a particular kind of object. As Levinas notes, eidetic structures 
(or groups of eidetic predicates) are not contingent features of an object. By way of 
eidetic variation, Husserl describes a method for arriving at the knowledge of 
essences, which operatives in every scienti ﬁ c discipline. As Levinas remarks, an 
individual object is indispensable for the intuition of an essence, yet such an intu-
ition, or  Wesensschau , is not merely the apprehension of an individual. 
 Important for Levinas is here the enlargement of intuition implicated by the 
theory of eidetics, and which Husserl  ﬁ rst proposed in the  Logische Untersuchungen . 
The knowledge of individual objects (“perceptual experience”)  as well as the 
intuition of essences is a “vision,” or seeing, in which the object is not merely 
intended or signi ﬁ ed, but  given with evidence, as its own evidence, as itself, clearly 
and distinctly. As Levinas remarks, this “extension of the concept of intuition in 
the sphere of essences and categorical forms allows Husserl to see in intuition the 
essential moment of true knowledge” (HI, 234). In this manner, knowledge aims at 
truth, and truth is a matter of vision and light. Levinas draws from Husserl’s theory 
of intuition the lesson that “truth depends on its object”—yet, this does not imply, 
as he is quick to note, and clearly with an eye towards Husserl’s Göttingen students, 
a “realistic metaphysics” (HI, 235). 
 Levinas marks a  ﬁ ne line between a “realistic metaphysics” and a traditional 
form of idealism in arguing that Husserl’s theory of eidetics commits him to neither. 
On the one hand, the theory of eidetics contains a critique of the critical idealism 
prevalent among Husserl’s contemporaries, for example, in Rickert. As Husserl 
develops in his 1927  Natur und Geist  lectures against Rickert, a theory of eidetics 
short-circuits the Kantian problem of a transcendental deduction or, in other words, 
the problem of how  a priori formal concepts are justi ﬁ ably applicable to a manifold 
of sensations  external to the space of reasons. 13 On the basis of his theory of eidet-
ics, Husserl rejects a “constructivist” program of idealism, as with Rickert’s method 
of  Begriffsbildung , and as still widely present today in different forms and guises. 
 On the other hand, the anchoring of a theory of eidetics in Husserl’s theory of 
intuition attempts to balance (albeit unsuccessfully, as Levinas argues at length in 
 Théorie de l’intuition dans la phénoménologie de Husserl ) an openness of knowl-
edge (consciousness as primarily an epistemological relation to beings) to evidence, 
to objects in their “self-givenness,” while at the same time rejecting the mute exis-
tence of the object of knowledge as independent of consciousness. Although here is 
 13  Cf. Andrea Staiti,  Geistigkeit, Leben und geschichtliche Welt in der Transzendentalphänomenologie 
Husserls (Würzburg: Ergon Verlag, 2010), Chapter 1. 
272
N. de Warren
not the place to fully explore this decisive claim, Husserl’s notion of intuition does 
not revert to a classical notion of intellectual intuition. Nor is Husserl’s  eidos a 
Platonic idea or an Aristotelian essence. Husserl’s concept of intuition indicates a 
radical openness of consciousness to the alterity of  evidence , of the object as itself-
given. In de ﬁ ning knowledge as targeting truth, knowledge targets its objects as 
“other than consciousness,” as transcendent, in the form of a face-to-face encounter. 
As Husserl writes: “Evidenz ist ein einem allerweitesten Sinne eine Erfahrung von 
Seiendem und So-Seiendem, eben ein  Es-selbst-geistig-zu-Gesicht-Bekommen ” 
(my emphasis, CM, § 5)—a characterization of evidence to which I shall return. For 
Levinas, the immediate consequence of Husserl’s theory of intuition and eidetics, in 
the  Ideen , consists in the view that rationalism and empiricism are reconciled; 
knowledge has its source in experience, yet experience, as intuition, is “self-given-
ness” of the object itself. 
 As Levinas further presents, this notion of eidetic sciences and  Wesensschau 
frames Husserl’s formulation of a theory of regional ontologies. Different regions of 
being are circumscribed by different structure of givenness, thus de ﬁ ning different 
kinds of objectivities; each region of being (life, culture, etc.) refers to a possible 
eidetic science (biology, etc.), and thus to a speci ﬁ c form of objectivity, or domain 
of possible experience. In addition to such material ontologies, Husserl identi ﬁ es 
the idea of a formal ontology, since each regional science, while referring to a par-
ticular materiality (animality, etc.), is also structured by formal concepts, such as 
“object in general.” Formal ontology deals with structural features and predicates 
belonging to all possible regional ontologies. Signi ﬁ cant for Levinas is that regional 
ontologies are determined through material essences, and not just in terms of formal 
ontology. Material ontologies are thus correlated to an  a priori , synthetic materiality 
of knowledge, such that, contra Kant and his epigones, there are as many categories 
of the understanding as there are regions of being. The categories of the understanding 
cannot be derived from a single principle (self-consciousness for German Idealism) 
or simply re ﬂ ect formal concepts aligned with different forms of judgment (as for 
Kant). As Levinas observes: “The  ﬁ eld of a priori synthetic knowledge is thus 
extremely extended thanks to this novel conception of apriori knowledge, which, for 
its part, is identi ﬁ ed with the intuition of material and formal essences” (HI, 238). 
As Mikel Dufrenne argued in  La Notion de l’A Priori , the  material a  priori represents 
one of Husserl’s most signi ﬁ cant philosophical innovations. 14 
 As Levinas quietly suggests, Husserl’s theory of eidetics can be seen as re-casting 
the problem of the many senses of being. Different regions of being are structured 
by different eidetic structures; there are as many scienti ﬁ c disciplines as there are 
regions of being. These different (material) regions of being de ﬁ ne the totality of 
human experience and knowledge. Additionally, considerations of formal ontology 
close, as it were, the rationality of the real. As Levinas notes, the task of exploring 
regional ontologies from a phenomenological standpoint became the endeavor of 
 14  Cf. Mikel Dufrenne,  The Notion of the A Priori , trans. E. Casey (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1966). 
273
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
Husserl’s students (with many of these studies appearing in Husserl’s  Jahrbuch ). 
However, “the phenomenology in the form sought after by Husserl is something 
else,” for phenomenology is neither de ﬁ ned by a particular regional ontology nor 
identi ﬁ ed with formal ontology, nor even concerned with the question of being—
contra Heidegger’s loud complaint. Instead, the genuine aim of phenomenological 
re ﬂ ection resides with providing an “absolute foundation for the sciences” or, in 
other words, a foundation for  ontic sciences —but this involves, as Levinas comes to 
understand, the radical possibility of a  break and distance from beings, from an 
attachment and directedness towards beings, but not, however, in the direction 
proposed by Heidegger towards the “hiddenness” of being. In the  Ideen , this 
challenge consists in questioning the intelligibility of beings in their many senses of 
givenness, without, however, appealing to any given region of being. In this manner, 
transcendental phenomenology aspires to achieve a transcendental status as a universal 
science, where the meanings of “transcendental” and “science” become mutually 
trans ﬁ gured. 15 
 The Passage to Phenomenology 
 As Levinas presents, phenomenology, as a new science of foundation, takes con-
sciousness, to which objects are given, as its principal theme of investigation. This 
turn away from beings (objects of consciousness) to consciousness itself requires an 
act of self-re ﬂ ection and a distancing, or bracketing, of any assumptions regarding 
the existence of objectivities. Stated with greater precision, phenomenology inves-
tigates descriptively the structured manners in which objects of experience are at all 
possibly given to consciousness. In this fashion, as Levinas observes, phenomenology 
innovatively reformulates “the great philosophical problem concerning the sense 
of transcendence” of objects (HI, 240). Levinas speaks here of “the sense of 
transcendence,” not “the sense of being,” nor “reality” or “existence,” and thus grasps 
the genuine intention of Husserl’s thinking in recognizing Husserl’s focus on the 
problem of transcendence. As Levinas further speci ﬁ es, to question the sense 
of how objects are given to consciousness, the sense of their objectivity as their 
transcendence,  is at the same time to question the meaning of existence as such, but 
to do so counter-intuitively in disregarding “existence” in favor attending to  how 
such objects are at all manifest, or given, as transcendent. 
 This “passage to phenomenology in the Husserlian sense of the term” requires 
what Husserl dubbed the suspension of the natural attitude and the reduction to 
transcendental consciousness (HI, 239). As Levinas proposes, the reduction is “ une 
violence que se fait l’homme ” in order to discover “man” (i.e., subjectivity) as  pure 
 15  It would be an intriguing exercise to read Levinas’s assessment of the  Ideen in tandem with 
Husserl and Heidegger’s joint attempts to arrive at common ground in their unsuccessful 
 Encyclopedia Britannica article. 
274
N. de Warren
thinking . 16 This unusual depiction of the phenomenological reduction contains two 
mutually enhancing expressions: violence and pure thinking. This “violence” of 
which Levinas speaks is to some degree anticipated by Husserl himself in the  Ideen 
with his characterization of the suspension of the natural attitude as  ﬁ guratively 
tantamount to a “destruction of the world.” Even if Husserl would later regret this 
sharp formulation, the salient point for Levinas consists in the thought that the sus-
pension institutes a fracture with our naïve attachment and directedness towards 
beings. With this fracture, a space of re ﬂ ection is opened in which, according to 
Levinas, transcendental subjectivity is discovered and illuminated as both origin 
and as pure thinking. 
 With the natural attitude, Husserl fashions one of his most fecund ideas, the aim 
of which is to describe the extent to which ordinary experience, but also the natural 
sciences and, indeed, the full spectrum of ontic scienti ﬁ c disciplines, are determined 
by a transcendental naiveté with regard to the possibility of experience. The natural 
attitude is properly speaking not a psychological state or disposition, but an unspo-
ken assumption and framing, a primordial belief, or  doxa , in the existence of the 
world. It designates, in other words, a pervasive condition of  unthinking in the sense 
of an unquestioned acceptance of the givenness of the world. In this regard, for 
Levinas, the dual operation of suspension and reduction rekindles and realigns—
indeed: re-invents—the meaning of philosophical questioning itself. This phenom-
enological renaissance of questioning represents a liberation of thinking from the 
world, not in any practical or political sense, but theoretically, in opening a critical 
distance from unre ﬂ ective, “natural,” attachments to the world. The suspension of 
the natural world sets into motion a movement of detachment, not for the purpose of 
an escape towards a world beyond, but on the contrary, as a means of encountering 
the world anew from the disinterested perspective of thinking, from the standpoint 
of reason, in the pursuit of fundamental clarity. 
 The reduction represents a neutralization, not rejection or refusal, in the speci ﬁ c 
sense that the world is no longer taken for granted when placed under the demand 
for transcendental clari ﬁ cation. Importantly, this self-re ﬂ ective distancing from 
the world does not amount to the discovery of negativity—and thus the  ﬁ rst motion 
of spirit’s progressive self-realization, nor, as with Descartes, the irruption of a 
doubt, or skepticism. As Husserl developed in the  Ideen , the suspension is a 
 modi ﬁ cation or neutralization , a “putting out of play,” of the general thesis of 
existence. In Husserl’s thinking, the radicality of reason is manifest through this 
change of attitude; transforming our unthinking comportment towards the world, 
predicated on the naive acceptance of the world, into an attitude that seeks above 
all fundamental clari ﬁ cation. In this respect, Husserl remains “Cartesian” and 
“Platonist,” remains true, in other words, to the legacy of metaphysics: the radi-
cality of reason consists in the capacity to take exception from the world and to 
rupture the pervasive  theoretical  naiveté of human existence. This violence against 
 16  Emmanuel Levinas, “L’oeuvre de Edmund Husserl,” in  En découvrant l’existence avec Husserl 
et Heidegger (Paris: Vrin, 1988), 7–51; 35; hereafter OH. 
275
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
captivity to a condition of “unthinking” is motivated by the interest of knowledge 
and directed by a demand for evidence. The violence of the reduction is the violence 
of light itself. 
 Husserl never explored the implicit ethics of knowledge that underlies the method 
of suspension and its guiding problem of transcendental constitution, even if he did 
struggle with the question of what motivates the transcendental reduction. In the 
 Ideen , Husserl refers opaquely to a “will to knowledge” in bluntly stating that the 
suspension and reduction are expressions of a theoretical freedom, otherwise left 
unspeci ﬁ ed. Along with this question of motivation, the reduction cannot be under-
stood without attending to the problem of transcendental constitution. The suspen-
sion clears the ground, as it were, for the implementation of the reduction, in its 
different moments, the aim of which is to uncover the basic activities, in their pas-
sive and active synthetic forms, of transcendental constitution. I will not here engage 
in the complex question of exactly what constitution means for Husserl—a topic 
that has been treated elsewhere, and yet remains in need of further understanding, 
as it de ﬁ nes the philosophical core of Husserl’s thinking. For my immediate pur-
pose, and brie ﬂ y stated, the reduction opens a  ﬁ eld of transcendental experience, by 
which Husserl understands, the  a priori correlation of noetic acts and noematic 
objects. In slackening the bonds of intentionality, as Levinas once elegantly stated, 
in order to render them descriptively available for investigation, the reduction also 
displaces the primacy of the question “what is x?” In this manner, the suspension of 
the natural attitude can be seen as a neutralization of the primacy of an ontological 
form of questioning in favor of a genuinely  transcendental question of constitution 
(i.e., questions of givenness). 
 Along with this displacement, the reduction also functions as the means for the 
self-illumination and self-discovery of transcendental subjectivity. In the form of 
transcendental re ﬂ ection (not to be confused with psychological re ﬂ ection or intro-
spection), the reduction is performative of transcendental subjectivity itself. As 
with the critical self-de ﬁ nition of reason in Kant’s  Kritik der reinen Vernunft , tran-
scendental subjectivity is in the  Ideen the object as well as the agent, or subject, of 
phenomenological critique: the reduction is performed  by  transcendental subjec-
tivity as well as performed  on transcendental subjectivity. A vexing problem 
emerges from this re ﬂ ective structure of investigation, namely, the apparent circu-
larity of constitutional analysis—but whether this circularity is vicious or not I 
shall leave here in suspense. 
 For my present concerns, it is because the question of givenness necessarily 
implicates a consciousness to whom something is given that the reduction is a per-
formative activity of transcendental subjectivity, part and parcel of a re ﬂ ection in 
which subjectivity comes to see itself in its own power of transcendental constitu-
tion. And it is precisely because transcendental subjectivity is the agent that consti-
tutes the sense of the world that this very same subjectivity can (and must, for 
Husserl) exercise responsibility for its own activity of constitution. In this regard, 
the reduction is the exercise of a transcendental freedom, understood primarily as 
a  responsibility  of subjectivity for its own transcendental activity of constitu-
tion. Importantly, transcendental re ﬂ ection does not  create its object of re ﬂ ection. 
276
N. de Warren
It discloses its object—its own activity of constitution as structured in intentionality—
in bringing itself to (its own) light. Transcendental re ﬂ ection discloses what has 
already been performed, and through phenomenological analysis, thus becomes re-
activated; it represents a kind of transcendental  anamnesis of the forgetfulness of an 
(its own) original constitution. 
 Transcendental Subjectivity 
 According to Levinas, the suspension of the general thesis of the natural attitude is 
radical in two related senses: it is universal in suspending the general thesis of the 
natural attitude; it leads to an origin in the sense of an absolute: transcendental 
subjectivity is absolute because it is essentially  pure thinking . The  ﬁ rst sense of 
relativity provides the center of gravity for the operation of the reduction and its 
 terminus ad quem , the uncovering of absolute subjectivity (de ﬁ ned essentially as 
“consciousness”). Objects of experience are questioned as relative to consciousness 
in terms of their respective manners of givenness. This discovery of the relativity of 
experience to absolute consciousness does not, however, amputate the world from 
consciousness, but, on the contrary, discovers the irreducible and primary  a priori 
correlation of consciousness and objectivity. 
 In his review, Levinas repeatedly underlines that intentionality is not a relation 
among separately existing dimensions (mind and world), but a “primordial phenom-
enon.” The aim of phenomenological re ﬂ ection is to provide descriptive analyses 
of how sensible givens (hyletic data) are animated by intentional acts in view of 
object so as to constitute an object as a unity and an identity (HI, 253). Levinas 
here speaks of the object of consciousness, constituted in intentionality, as “ un 
existant,  comme connu avec raison” (HI, 253). This emphasis on “known with reason” 
signals the primacy of theoretical knowledge that shapes Husserl’s conception of 
intentionality (as paradigmatically perceptual and objectifying). With the noetic-
noematic correlation, “the investigation of consciousness allows us to apprehend 
the manner of being of each category of objects in consciousness, and thus, allow 
us to investigate the sense of the existence of things” (HI, 255). Within this  ﬁ eld of 
research, Husserl distinguishes between immanent and transcendent perception. 
In transcendent perception, the object is given inadequately, whereas in immanent 
perception, the object is adequately given. Even though Levinas notes Husserl’s 
divergence from Descartes, he nonetheless considers Husserl beholden to a 
Cartesian privilege of the knowing subject or, more accurately stated, the self-
knowing subject, since Levinas stresses the passage from inadequate to adequate 
perception as the passage through the reduction to the  ﬁ eld of transcendental 
subjectivity and its adequate self-illumination. 
 The accomplishment of the reduction illuminates the relativity of the world in 
both senses: if objects of experience are objects  for consciousness, the reduction 
thus opens the way for an investigation of distinctive styles of givenness as revealed 
in the  ﬁ eld of transcendental experience. This  ﬁ eld of pure consciousness is, in turn, 
277
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
itself adequately given to phenomenological re ﬂ ection, as distinguished from the 
inadequate manner of perceptual givenness. For Levinas, both of these senses of 
relativity re ﬂ ect the “primacy of theoretical knowledge” that motivates the reduc-
tion. Levinas here most clearly adopts and endorses Heidegger’s critique: the deter-
mination of consciousness through immanent perception re ﬂ ects Husserl’s 
commitment to the privilege of theoretical (self)-knowledge. As Heidegger would 
have it, Husserl’s conception of transcendental subjectivity is over-determined by a 
care for knowledge. 17 
 In addition to this critical posture towards the theoretical over-determination of the 
reduction, Levinas proposes a second, contrasting reading of the reduction as an “inner 
revolution rather than a search for certitude” (OH, 38), the axis of which turns on the 
freedom of consciousness; as Levinas further speci ﬁ es: “the freedom of conscious-
ness is de ﬁ ned precisely by the situation of evidence” (OH, 38). The radicality of 
reason consists in the demand for evidence, for the showing of things themselves. As 
Levinas critically investigated in his study of Husserl’s theory of intuition , evidence, 
for Husserl, is not a psychological quality or feeling, nor a naive acceptance of the 
brute givenness of things (i.e., the myth of the given). Evidence, robustly understood 
and concretely experienced, that is,  meaningfully  experienced, is the ful ﬁ llment of an 
empty intentionality. In this regard, the Husserlian thesis of consciousness as inten-
tionality is not simply to be phrased as the claim that “consciousness is the conscious-
ness of an object,” but more emphatically, as the claim that, dynamically structured in 
empty and ful ﬁ lled intentions, consciousness is open to the transcendence of evi-
dence, of objects as presented to consciousness “in  ﬂ esh and blood.” 
 It is in this sense that we are to understand Levinas’s contention that the reduc-
tion, as the disclosing of the situation of consciousness in the face of evidence, 
represents a “liberation of human beings from the world.” This liberation is not a 
denial or negation of the world; it is the recognition—and the value placed on this 
recognition—of the relativity of experience to evidence. This relativity of experi-
ence is not the super ﬁ cial sense of things changing, but the recognition of how the 
inadequacy of perceptual experience (a perceptual object as given through adum-
brations, etc.) motivates the pursuit of evidence (i.e., adequation or pure thinking, 
“intellection,” given that both expressions appear synonymous for Levinas). If we 
turn directly to Husserl’s meticulous descriptions of perceptual experience in his 
lectures on passive synthesis, for example, the perceptual object is characterized as 
“calling” to be turned, to be seen, etc. It belongs to the movement of perceptual 
experience to pursue what is seen through the further unfolding of seeing itself; it 
belongs, in other words, to the nature of perceptual experience to be  curious in 
wanting to see (to know) (more). 
 There is yet another signi ﬁ cant aspect to Levinas’s portrait of the reduction as the 
openness of consciousness to evidence. As a counterpart to this stress on evidence 
as a moment of liberation from naïve acceptance of the world, the reduction also 
 17  Cf. Martin Heidegger,  Introduction to Phenomenological Research , trans. D. Dahlstrom 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005). 
278
N. de Warren
represents the liberation of transcendental subjectivity from attachment to beings 
and ontological determinations. As is well known, Husserl took Natorp to task in 
the  Logische Untersuchungen for his acceptance of a pure ego; namely, the view 
that, along the lines of Kant’s transcendental apperception, the pure ego is the sub-
ject or bearer of experiences, or mental representations. In the  Ideen , in avowing, on 
the one hand, that this earlier rejection of the pure ego in the  Logische Untersuchungen 
was pre-mature, Husserl, on the other hand, still retains a critical distance from 
Natorp’s notion of pure ego as well as the original Kantian conception of transcen-
dental apperception. As Levinas argues, when situated within the methodological 
operation of the reduction, the pure ego in the  Ideen does not represent the re-
introduction of an underlying subject as the bearer of mental states. As Levinas 
stresses, transcendental subjectivity cannot be grasped as a being or as an entity—as 
something existing or substantial—thus further radicalizing Kant’s critique of 
rational psychology in the  Kritik der reinen Vernunft . As proposed by Husserl, the 
pure ego (or transcendental subject/subjectivity—Levinas appears to take these 
terms as synonymous) is,  pace Levinas, “a manner of experiencing or living inten-
tional relations” (OH, 40). 
 In the context of transcendental phenomenology, and as Husserl himself was at 
pains to understand completely, “this manner of living” (or “transcendental experi-
ence”) cannot be thought in a constituted, objecti ﬁ ed manner, as formally isometric 
with its constituted objectivities. Transcendental subjectivity, as a constitutional 
activity, or “living,” is not to be confused with the psychological mind or other natu-
ralized conception. If the reduction aims to uncover absolute consciousness, this 
absolute is in turn not characterized as “being.” In Husserl’s writings, this obscure 
status of transcendental subjectivity played itself out on the conceptual terrain of the 
self-constituting form of absolute consciousness and its paradoxical condition as 
both constituted and constituting—problems whose center of gravity are located in 
the issue of inner time-consciousness. 
 As Levinas notes in his review, inner time-consciousness contains the “veritable 
secret itself of subjectivity,” as it holds the key to understanding the absence of any 
subject, or ego, behind the  ﬂ ux of time, and thus the genuine meaning of conscious-
ness as absolute  in a transcendental meaning . Transcendental subjectivity is consti-
tuted within the  ﬂ ow of constituted temporality and itself constitutes this  ﬂ ow 
without, however, collapsing, as it were, entirely into the  ﬂ ow of constituted inten-
tionalities, including its own self-objecti ﬁ ed manner of being. Notoriously, how-
ever, as Husserl indicates in §81 of the  Ideen , this fundamental dimension of inner 
time-consciousness is omitted from the scope of the  Ideen , thus indicating that the 
absolute status of transcendental subjectivity, as discovered by the reduction  within 
the purview of the  Ideen , remains fundamentally incomplete. The  Ideen has not 
discovered the genuine absolute; the reduction has not proceeded far enough. 
 In the context of his review, what Levinas characterizes as the “freedom of con-
sciousness” is expressed in Husserl’s thinking as the power of constitution or, in other 
words, the power of transcendental synthesis that de ﬁ nes the primary and irreducible 
manner of “living” intentional relations. The freedom of consciousness resides in its 
capacity of  Sinngebung . Transcendental subjectivity is not itself “of the world” in the 
279
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
sense of an entity or being, something itself constituted; it is an  origin in the sense of 
 self- and  other-constituting . Thus understood, the certitude of the cogito (the “absolute” 
of consciousness—that which survives the reduction) is neither an axiom or  ﬁ rst prin-
ciple, nor even a foundation in any traditional sense, but an original situation, or, more 
precisely stated, the situation of an origin—the situation of consciousness face to face 
with evidence. This uncovering of transcendental subjectivity as origin requires,  pace 
Levinas, an uncompromising reduction of all reference to exteriority. As Levinas 
writes, the reduction leads to “the situation of a mind that, instead of relating or com-
porting itself as a being among other beings,  ﬁ nds itself the moment it has neutralized 
all of its relations with exteriority.” In other words: “a situation in which the mind 
exists as a commencement, as an origin” (OH, 46). 
 In Levinas’s assessment, the phenomenological reduction discovers transcen-
dental subjectivity as an origin but also as inseparably wedded to itself, as self-
constituting. To be absolute, on this reading, is to be condemned, as it were, to be 
oneself, to only be oneself and nothing else; it is to be alone and to discover this 
solitude as one’s ownmost, as one’s constitutional power of solitude. Levinas 
identi ﬁ es the discovery of transcendental subjectivity as framed and motivated by 
the primacy of theoretical knowledge, and thus repeatedly speaks of the reduction 
as the liberation of “pure thinking.” Even if Husserl did not himself baptize absolute 
subjectivity as “pure thinking,” Levinas must surely have in mind echoes of the 
Aristotelian active intellect ( noesis noeseos ). In Husserl, however, and in the speci ﬁ c 
form of transcendental subjectivity, “pure thinking” refers to the power of constitu-
tion ( Sinngebung ) in its self-temporalization. 
 Gadamer registers a similar proposal in his comments on the fundamental status 
of time-consciousness for Husserlian phenomenology. As he observes: “But clearly 
on this deepest level of the self-constitution of temporality, where it is a question 
of the primal source of the  ﬂ ow of the immediate present, a self-relational charac-
ter that contains no distinction between what is giving and what is given (or better, 
what is received) must be assumed. Instead, it is a kind of mutual encompassing, 
as it is structurally appropriate to life—to Plato’s  autokinoun . But the classical 
doctrine of the  noesis noeseos and the doctrine of the  intellectus agens are also 
con ﬁ rmed here.” 18  
 Even if Levinas recognizes the self-relation of transcendental subjectivity as 
involving an intentionality of a different kind from the intentionality of objects 
(indeed, this is one the main lessons learned by Husserl through his meticulous inves-
tigations into inner time-consciousness), he nonetheless speaks of this self-relation 
as an “intellection,” by which he understands primarily the Parmenidian identity of 
being and thinking. For, indeed, as Husserl argues in formulations of absolute time-
constituting consciousness known to Levinas by way of Heidegger’s 1928 edition of 
the  Vorlesungen zum inneren Zeitbewu b tsein , absolute consciousness is de ﬁ ned by the 
seamless identity of being and perceiving: for absolute consciousness,  esse est percipi . 
 18  Hans-Georg Gadamer, “The Phenomenological Movement,”  Philosophical Hermeneutics 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), 167. 
280
N. de Warren
On the one hand, as Derrida observes, Levinas clearly recognizes that, “Husserl so 
little predetermined being as object that in the  Ideen I  absolute existence is accorded 
only to pure consciousness.” 19  This transcendental—as opposed to ontological—
determination of subjectivity represents in Levinas’s eyes the promise of a radical 
non-metaphysical conception that has ruptured with ontology. On the other hand, 
Levinas objects to the recalcitrance of the subject-object correlation, as manifest in 
Husserl’s argument for the irreducible phenomenon of intentionality, even in the 
form of its own self-relation as absolute. Transcendental subjectivity is “pure think-
ing” to the extent that, as Levinas proposes, “what characterizes the essence of rea-
son is thus not such and such form, such and such law of thinking or a logical 
category;  it is a certain mode of relating to an object in which the object is given with 
evidence and is present ‘in person’ in front of consciousness ” (HI, 260). 
 On this interpretation, two decisive thoughts are brought together. Levinas traces 
the contours of the discovery of transcendental subjectivity by way of the reduction 
as the discovery of freedom. This freedom, however, is thought as  sovereignty , 
understood in a transcendental sense: it designates the mastery of subjectivity over 
beings through the constitutional power of  Sinngebung and the responsibility of 
such mastery over its own power as expressed in the reduction. The dual character-
ization of subjectivity as origin and self-relation (or “ipseity”) forms Husserl’s 
thinking into an incandescent medium for a metaphysics of light in two senses: as 
self-relation (or identity) and as  Sinngebung , as the source of “illumination,” under-
stood by Levinas in a Heideggerian vein: transcendental subjectivity is the clearing 
( Lichtung ) in which beings reveal themselves. 
 Light and Reason 
 The dual aspect of the inner revolution of the reduction (transcendental subjectivity 
and transcendence of evidence) re ﬂ ects a tension within Husserlian phenomenol-
ogy. As Levinas proposes, “Husserl’s idealism attempts to de ﬁ ne the subject as 
origin, as the place or situation in which all things  respond themselves” (my emphasis, 
OH, 46). As discussed, Levinas interprets Husserl’s conception of transcendental 
subjectivity as “origin of the world” situated in front of evidence. As already 
indicated, Husserl de ﬁ nes evidence as the “living presence” of an object, as given to 
consciousness “in  ﬂ esh and blood.” As Husserl writes in  Cartesianische Meditationen : 
“Evidenz ist in einem allerweitesten Sinne eine Erfahrung von Seiendem und 
So-Seiendem, eben ein  Es-selbst-geistig-zu-Gesicht-Bekommen ” (my emphasis, 
CM, §5). Evidence is, in other words, a “face to face encounter,” an encounter with 
an object in such a manner that this object reveals its own true face. 20 Levinas, for 
 19  Jacques Derrida, “Violence and Metaphysics,”  Writings and Difference , trans. Alan Bass 
(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1978), 85. 
 20  One cannot fail to recognize the manner in which, in Levinas’s own rehabilitation of the priority 
of the Other, the face of the Other is not a visible form of self-showing or evidence: the Other 
resists the Husserlian conception of  Es-selbst-geistig-zu-Gesicht-Bekommen . 
281
16 Emmanuel Levinas and a Soliloquy of Light and Reason
his part, speaks here of evidence in terms of response; it is a suggestive interpolation 
that already indicates one of the basic trajectories of Levinas’s own thinking. 
This shift from “showing” to “responding” is not an innocent change of terminology. 
 Consciousness responds to evidence; by the same token, evidence solicits forth a 
response from consciousness (in the lectures on passive synthesis, for example, 
Husserl describes objects as calling to me, etc.). A tension takes form between, on 
the one hand, transcendental subjectivity as an origin in the sense of its constitu-
tional activity of  Sinngebung and, on the other hand, transcendental subjectivity as 
an origin in the sense of a situation, or posture, before evidence to which the subject 
responds. We can here discern the outlines of a further radicalization of thought 
with the  inversion of transcendental constitution that generally structures Levinas’s 
over-coming of transcendental phenomenology. For instead of speaking of inten-
tionality as grounded in the  constituting sovereignty of subjectivity, Levinas will 
propose the notion of  counter-intentionality , by which the constitutional privilege 
of subjectivity is both undermined and reversed. Rather than the (solitary) subject 
constituting itself, the subject becomes itself  called forth in responding to the solici-
tations of the Other. Rather than respond from and for itself, the subject is itself a 
response to the Other—it responds  to the Other, in the name of the Other. 
 Although Levinas does not spell out this guiding insight, the intentionality of 
evidence can be seen as an intentionality of question and answer, or response. An 
empty intentionality is akin to a claim or question posed to the world. In so doing, 
consciousness exposes—opens—itself to evidence and, likewise, implicitly accepts 
itself as responsible for its claim on the world. Evidence is the vulnerability of con-
sciousness in its claim to knowledge. When one, in addition, considers the teleo-
logical dynamic that, according to Husserl, structures intentionality in its empty and 
ful ﬁ lled dimensions, one can further characterize consciousness as animated by a 
“desire to know,” that is, a desire for an encounter with the object itself. An empty 
intention is animated by a desire for the presence of its intended object. Moreover, 
evidence is neither mechanically imposed from the outside nor unthinkingly 
accepted from inside. Our taking responsibility for evidence takes the form of 
speaking for it, on speaking on its behalf. We come to speak on behalf of evidence 
in taking responsibility for it. In taking responsibility for evidence we take respon-
sibility for ourselves as knowing subjects. This ineliminable self-reference in 
responsibility marks the transcendental sovereignty of self-constitution. As Levinas 
writes: “The subject is absolute not because it is indubitable but the subject is indu-
bitable because the subject always  responds from or for itself and to itself” (OH, 47; 
my emphasis). 
 With this characterization, the circle is closed: despite Husserl’s stress on evidence 
as the genuine mark of transcendence, his commitment to the determination of evidence 
as “presence” and “face-to-face encounter” reveals the profound relationship 
between reason and solitude, between the violence of light and constitutional sover-
eignty. In Levinas’s construal, the solitude of pure thinking (alternatively: transcen-
dental subjectivity in its primarily theoretical relation to beings) takes the form of a 
radical reduction of exteriority; the reduction is the exercise of a self-responsibility 
directed at oneself, not towards the Other. As Levinas further spells out: “Vision, in effect, 
is essentially an adequation of exteriority to interiority: exteriority is reabsorbed 
282
N. de Warren
in the contemplating soul, and, as an  adequate idea , is revealed  a priori , resulting in 
a  Sinngebung .” This characterization of transcendental subjectivity, in its activity of 
constitution, as “responding for and from itself,” reveals the truth of transcendental 
idealism as a perfected soliloquy of light and reason. Platonism is ful ﬁ lled in 
Husserl’s  Ideen by transcendental means, for even in the form of transcendental 
subjectivity, and despite its radical rupture from ontology, “the idea of light, the 
intelligible sun conditions all existence.” 
 As I have argued, Levinas considers Husserl’s  Ideen as the perfected soliloquy of 
light and reason; the reduction to the absolute of a solitary transcendental subjectivity, 
as situated “face to face” with beings, ful ﬁ lls the secret (metaphysical) desire of 
Western Philosophy. Yet, this soliloquy of light and reason is nonetheless perforated 
by “holes,” or omissions, that render its phenomenological song of reason incomplete. 
These two omissions de ﬁ ne a negative space around the image of the  Ideen that 
progressively de ﬁ nes the space of Levinas’s thinking against Husserl’s transcendental 
soliloquy. I have already noted Husserl’s exclusion of the “deeper layer” of absolute 
time-consciousness from the scope of the  Ideen’s reduction and its exposition 
of absolute subjectivity in the  Ideen . As Levinas examines in his later essay 
“Intentionality and Sensation,” Husserl’s analysis of inner time-consciousness 
harbors the thought of a non-objective intentionality that promises a path for regaining 
an exteriority that is not reduced to objectivity and the active, constitutional sover-
eignty of the solitary ego. Likewise, and as Levinas observes in the concluding 
paragraph of his review, the image of transcendental thinking in the  Ideen critically 
excludes a full account of inter-subjectivity, on which, however, the structures 
of horizon are dependent. As Levinas remarks, if phenomenology aims to ful ﬁ ll 
its ambition of investigating “the sense of the truth of being, it must over-come 
[ depasser ] the quasi-solipsistic attitude put in place by the phenomenological reduc-
tion and which can be called an egological reduction ” (HI, 265). As with the problem 
of time-consciousness, Levinas discerns in the egological reduction, leading to the 
constitution of the Other, the promise and means of transcendental phenomenology’s 
own undoing from within. It would not be an over-statement to claim that this dual 
exclusion of time and the Other from the image of thought in the  Ideen negatively 
traces a possible space of thought that Levinas would untiringly explore in his epic 
struggle against Western philosophy’s soliloquy of light and reason. 
283
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_17, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 “And So I Became Heir of a ‘Tradition’” 
 Above and beyond the in ﬂ uence of any one of his books, Edmund Husserl had an 
important personal impact on the young Jan Patočka. The two  ﬁ rst met in Paris, on 
the occasion of a series of lectures that Husserl, at the invitation of Alexandre 
Koyré, gave at the Sorbonne in 1929; these lectures, which were also attended by 
Emmanuel Levinas, were to form the textual basis for the  Cartesianische 
Meditationen . At the time, Patočka was still a student, and his encounter with 
Husserl sparked his philosophical imagination, leading to a research visit in 
Freiburg that began in the dark year of 1933, after Husserl’s  ﬁ nal retirement. In 
these last years before Husserl’s death in 1938, the two men developed a close 
philosophical relationship that, even if not as extensive, was at least comparable to 
that of Husserl and Eugen Fink, with whom Patočka would also develop a lifelong 
relationship. In 1934, Husserl asked Patočka to read his paper for the Philosophical 
Congress in Prague, and in 1935, Patočka was involved, as secretary of the  Cercle 
philosophique , in hosting a lecture Husserl himself gave in Prague, the text of 
which represents an important background source for Part I of the  Krisis . 1 The 
fundamental characteristics of Patočka’s philosophical sensibilities and commit-
ments were forged in these years, as well as his interest in a wide range of ques-
tions both phenomenological and historical; above all, his thinking about the 
meaning of Europe received a decisive impetus that would unfold into one of the 
 J.  Dodd ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  The New School for Social Research ,  New York ,  NY ,  USA 
e-mail:  doddj@newschool.edu 
 Chapter 17 
 Jan Patočka and Built Space 
 James  Dodd   
 1  Edmund Husserl,  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänome-
nologie , Husserliana 6, ed. W. Biemel (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976). 
284
J. Dodd
most striking re ﬂ ections on the problem in the history of twentieth century philosophy. 2 
Yet the most important factor in Patočka’s development was, in ways reminiscent 
of Levinas’ account of the profound personal impact that Husserl had on many of 
his students, 3  the fact that the belief in philosophy as a vocation, one tied intimately 
to the spiritual situation of the age, was driven home for Patočka by the inspiring 
 ﬁ gure of the aging Husserl. This  ﬁ nds symbolic expression in the story Patočka 
tells late in life (in his 1976 “Erinnerungen an Husserl”) of a gift Husserl presented 
to him in Freiburg on Christmas 1934 of an old wooden lectern that had once been 
owned by T.G. Masaryk, a common in ﬂ uence on and fellow countryman to both 
men. “Ich wurde so zum Erben einer großen ‘Tradition,’” Patočka recounts, 
“welcher ich mich nie würdig genug empfand.” 4  
 This relationship, both with respect to its deeply personal character as well as its 
formative intellectual in ﬂ uence on Patočka’s early career, is important to keep in 
mind when assessing the speci ﬁ c in ﬂ uence of Husserl’s 1913  Ideen on the develop-
ment of Patočka’s phenomenology. As an intimate member of Husserl’s circle during 
his last years, Patočka experienced phenomenology as an ethos of philosophical 
practice; he had access to Husserl’s working manuscripts, and in Eugen Fink an 
indispensable guide to a  ﬁ rst introduction, not so much to the dogma of Husserlian 
phenomenology, as to its promise and hope. The promise of phenomenology for 
this circle of thinkers was to open up traditional problems anew, to rediscover in a 
radical fashion the existential motivations of philosophical re ﬂ ection that had once 
and could still animate the tradition. Thus when, in the passage from his “Erinnerungen” 
cited above, Patočka puts the word “Tradition” in quotes, he is re ﬂ ecting an attitude 
towards philosophy characteristic of these early years of his career, for which 
phenomenological philosophy was not a “tradition” in the sense of the forward 
movement of something established, but as something taken up  to be established. 
 When we turn to Patočka’s relation to the  Ideen , we need to keep this attitude in 
mind, in order to understand Patočka’s complicated relationship with Husserl’s 
thought. And in fact from this perspective one could argue that the  Ideen proves to 
be the most important of Husserl’s published works for Patočka, an argument that 
becomes even stronger when we take into consideration the obvious importance of 
the second volume of the  Ideen , above all with respect to the problem of the body. 5 
 2  For an early example of this line of thought that is contemporary to the period of his association 
with Husserl, see Jan Patočka, “Masaryk’s and Husserl’s Conception of the Spiritual Crisis of 
European Humanity,”  Jan Patočka: Philosophy and Selected Writings , trans. E. Kohák (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1989). (Translation of “Masarykovo a Husserlovo pojetí duševní 
krise evropského lidstva,”  Kvart 3/2 (1936): 91–102). 
 3  See Levinas, “The Ruin of Representation,”  Discovering Existence with Husserl , trans. Richard 
Cohen and Michael Smith (Evanston: Northwestern, 1998). 
 4  Patočka, “Erinnerungen an Husserl,”  Jan Patočka: Texte—Dokumente—Bibliographie , ed. 
L. Hagedorn and H. R. Sepp (Freiburg: Alber/Prag: Oikoymenh, 1999), 282. 
 5  Here see from around 1960 “L’espace et sa problematique (Prostor a jeho problematika),” Patočka, 
 Qu’est-ce que la phénoménologie? , trans. E. Abrams (Grenoble: Millon, 1988); from around 1967 
“La phénomenologie du corps propre (Fenomenologie vlastního těla),”  Études phénoménologiques , 
trans. E. Abrams 1 (1985): 41–63; and the 1968/69 lectures  Body, Community, Language, World 
(Tělo, společenství, jayzk, svět), trans. E. Kohák (Chicago: Open Court, 1998). 
285
17 Jan Patočka and Built Space
For the transcendental idealism that Husserl articulates in the  Ideen becomes the 
central challenge of his thought for Patočka; its critique forms the crux of his attempt 
to appropriate, in many ways against Heidegger, those philosophical insights into 
phenomenality and method that he considers essential. The main line of Patočka’s 
approach is to submit to a fundamental critique Husserl’s conception of transcen-
dental consciousness, and to argue that Husserl’s conception of phenomenality can 
be separated in a meaningful fashion from his conception of transcendental subjec-
tivity. This twofold strategy takes on a number of permutations in Patočka’s work 
from the 1930s until his death in 1977. 
 To understand what is at issue, Patočka’s own 1936 Habilitation can be employed 
as representing an argument for the  inseparability of transcendental subjectivity and 
phenomenality, interestingly articulated in terms of the problem of the “natural 
world.” 6 Here Patočka understands Husserl’s approach as essentially a metaphysical 
re ﬂ ection, one that secures the possibility of an access to phenomenality—that is, 
where the being of transcendental subjectivity secures the conditions for the philo-
sophical problematic of the phenomenon as such. Through the in ﬂ uence of Fink and 
Heidegger, this understanding of phenomenology (even as a reading of Husserl) 
gradually becomes problematic for Patočka, culminating in the robust formulation 
of its critique in the philosophical program of an “a-subjective” phenomenology in 
the early 1970s. 7 This program is best understood as an attempt to preserve what 
Patočka considers to be of fundamental value in Husserl’s thought, namely the phil-
osophical concept of the  epochē . The program in its essentials can in fact be 
described as an attempt to decouple the  epochē from the reduction to transcendental 
subjectivity, thus in effect arguing for the independence of phenomenological 
re ﬂ ection from the metaphysics that Patočka sees dominating the discussions in 
 Ideen I §§47–55 concerning the contrast between the being of the world and the 
being of subjectivity. 8 
 This strategy of decoupling also guides Patočka’s reading of Husserl’s own 
development. In Chapter Six of his 1965  Introduction to Husserl’s Phenomenology , 9 
for example, he contrasts Husserl’s  ﬁ rst presentation of the  epochē and reduction in 
the 1907 lectures  Die Idee der Phänomenologie 10  with the presentation in  Ideen 
 6  Patočka,  Le monde naturel comme problème philosophique (Přirozený svět jako  ﬁ loso ﬁ cký 
problém), trans. J. Daněk (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976). 
 7  Two texts are of central importance here: “Der Subjektivismus der Husserlschen und die 
Möglichkeit einer <<asubjektiven>> Phänomenologie (1970),” and “Der Subjektivismus der 
Husserlschen und die Forderung einer asubjektiven Phänomenologie (1971),” both in:  Patočka, 
Die Bewegung der menschlichen Existenz. Phänomenologische Schriften II , ed. K. Nellen et al. 
(Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1991). 
 8  See here the invaluable collection of late essays and manuscript materials published as  Vom 
Erscheinen als solchem: Texte aus dem Nachlaß , ed. H. Blaschek-Hahn and K. Novotný (München: 
Alber, 2000). 
 9  Patočka,  Introduction to Husserl’s Phenomenology (Úvod do Husserlovy fenomenologie), trans. 
E. Kohák (Chicago: Open Court, 1996). 
 10  Edmund Husserl,  Die Idee der Phänomenologie. Fünf Vorlesungen .  Husserliana 2, ed. W. Biemel 
(The Hague: Nijhoff, 1973). 
286
J. Dodd
I §§27–32, 56–62, tracking Husserl’s development from an initial position, which 
on Patočka’s account is effectively metaphysically neutral, to the position of the 
mature Husserl that embraces the absolute character of subjective being as securing 
the ground of phenomenological method. Yet one should also cite here a number of 
texts of Patočka’s where the issue does not simply turn on a critique of metaphysics 
in Husserl, but where instead he attempts to highlight the importance of the indi-
vidual phenomenological investigations of space, temporality, bodily comportment, 
ideality and the like that are indifferent to the contrast between the absolute being of 
consciousness and the relative being of the world. Patočka points in this direction in 
the last two chapters of the  Introduction which are dedicated to the topics of tempo-
rality and incarnate existence, but above all one thinks here of the 1968/1969 
lectures  Body, Community, Language, World , which draw on many levels from the 
individual analyses of  Ideen II . 
 Body, Community, Language, World also exempli ﬁ es another fundamental aspect 
of Patočka’s engagement with the thought of Husserl, namely his attempt to read 
phenomenology in dialogue with other moments both ancient and modern in the 
history of philosophy. Few thinkers have done this with the breadth of scholarship 
and interpretive courage of Patočka, who during his career embarked on major studies 
of Renaissance thought (here one thinks of his seminal work on Comenius), ancient 
philosophy (above all Aristotle), and the history of science. 11 If Patočka never felt 
himself worthy of the tradition to which he was symbolically and personally bound 
by Edmund Husserl, one must nevertheless recognize in his  oeuvre a remarkable 
achievement in illuminating both its deep roots in the history of thought and its 
ongoing future promise. 
 Remarks Towards a Phenomenology of Built-Space 
 The phenomenology of Jan Patočka is characterized by a strong emphasis on the 
description of incarnate, bodily existence in the development of the philosophical 
problem of the being of the world. In this spirit, I would like to pursue a re ﬂ ection here 
on what I take to be an essential dimension of human incarnate existence, namely that 
it is able to comport itself as an access to the world in the form of something  built . 
 In what follows, I will emphasize three phenomenological aspects of the built-
world. All three have to do with the central theme of  orientation . The  ﬁ rst is the 
 intersubjective dimension of built-space; the second its  egoic or  personal dimen-
sion; and  ﬁ nally its  bodily or  corporeal dimension. These three senses of orientation 
interpenetrate, of course, and in fact the  ﬁ rst, that of intersubjectivity, cannot be 
properly understood outside of this interpenetration—thus we will take it up  ﬁ rst. 
 11  See the extensive bibliography of Patočka’s work, both published and unpublished, in,  Texte—
Dokumente—Bibliographie , ed. L. Hagedorn and H. R. Sepp, 527 f. 
287
17 Jan Patočka and Built Space
 First Dimension: Intersubjectivity 
 A dif ﬁ culty in any discussion of intersubjectivity is the tendency to understand the 
theme too narrowly, limiting the question to a description of the experience of the 
presence of other individual subjects. Clearly, others leave their marks on things 
(this chip on the edge of the coffee table comes from Pierre, who dropped a heavy 
paperweight on it; the wooden threshold of the doorway is worn away from years of 
human and animal traf ﬁ c, and so on); and it is also clear that others have an impact 
on how I go about moving around in space (I made it to the café by following 
Pierre’s directions, or just by following Pierre himself). A narrow sense of intersub-
jectivity would limit the issue to the manner in which we can “read” things so as to 
trace their properties and features back to the actions of a particular individual or 
individuals—such as the bricklayer who carefully laid the courses of the brick wall 
in a stretcher bond, or the artist who applied paint to a prepared canvas surface. 
Things are shaped, formed, and ordered by the actions of others, and we can think 
of any such construction or ordering of things that results in terms of the function of 
the actions of those who “built” them (as when archaeologists, for example, try to 
“reconstruct” the techniques of Egyptian pyramid builders based on clues provided 
by the given structures themselves, functionally mapping their properties onto the 
known capacities of tools from the same historical period). 
 This point of departure sets up a particular focus, whereby we make thematic the 
“others”—those who built, lived, and experienced what it is that we encounter in the 
things that bear their mark—in a manner that keeps close to the given things  as 
things . This focus is not in itself objectionable. The phenomenality of the thing 
certainly includes this feature of an actual or possible having come from the hands 
of others. The thing-character of the brick wall, or the worn doorway, is plastic 
enough to capture and absorb in a manifold of ways those activities that gave it 
shape. This plasticity in turn partially justi ﬁ es the limitation of the theme of inter-
subjectivity I would nevertheless like to guard against, according to which we take 
to be relevant only what this capacity of things to bear the mark of others can bring 
 close to us . We are, in fact, most inclined to engage this capacity of things to bring 
others close to us; so we “see,” manifest in the ordered pattern of the bricks in a 
wall, the active being of the “other,” a being manifest not only in the visible effects 
of the application of a technique. There is also, for example, the unbearable effort 
and pain of laborers made present to us in the monstrous mass of the pyramid; or we 
recall in the grace of the columns and facades of the Parthenon that fateful mix of 
industriousness and ambition characteristic of the ancient Athenians. We want to 
see artifacts as connections, bringing the lives of others into proximity to us. 
 However, this approach tends towards a distortion. For in the end, what is essen-
tial with respect to the theme of “others” must include a consideration of what is and 
remains  distant . The entire force of the presence of others is not limited to what we 
know about them having an anchor, so to speak, in the given, or in the potential for 
things to serve as instances or evidence of the known, but is also embodied in the 
force of distance constitutive of intersubjectivity. 
288
J. Dodd
 Yet here problems arise. What does it mean, that others are “distant,” and how 
can  distance be understood as a force of  presence ? Do not others have presence for 
me precisely to the extent to which they are situated among things, just as I am? And 
if they are no longer “here,” how could they form and shape the sense of things, 
apart from leaving their prints, so to speak, on the surface of things, as a kind of 
mark of their past presence, to be interpreted by our knowledge of them? What more 
could be said about distance, apart from the simple fact that I cannot always take a 
print and match it up to the  ﬁ nger that put it there? 
 Let us consider an example different from pyramids, brick walls, and thresholds 
to see if we can, if not break, then at least put into perspective the hegemony of the 
theme of proximate presence. I am walking along a path in the woods, and come 
upon a bench that looks out over a view of the valley. As I look around, I notice that 
this spot must have been chosen precisely because it is the position from which one 
has the best view of the valley, and that the bench has been placed in the optimal 
orientation within the parameters of the location. If it had been turned more to the 
left or the right, it would have been more dif ﬁ cult to take in the full force of the 
view; or if it had been facing in the opposite direction, I would have been left staring 
at the side of a relatively uninteresting rocky cliff. 
 The space in which, sitting on the bench, I take in the view of the valley is, I would 
argue, “built.” Not because the things located in this space are built—certainly the 
bench is a built-thing, but the manner in which it is built into the space under 
consideration has more to do with its function in orienting my perceiving, as a 
bodily orientation, in accordance with the manifestation of the view of the valley. 
What is built in a primary sense is the “view on the valley” itself, though in a manner 
in which things, taken as logically individuated unities of sense in themselves, are 
not. The view is “built” in the sense of a patterned orchestration of the visibility of 
things that emerges directly out of the simple act of placing a bench that faces 
“towards” a potential view; the result of building is that the view now has a unique 
phenomenological presence within my experience of the space around me. Now, the 
view without the bench would be, of course, still there, in its “unbuilt” mode as it 
were—yet it would nevertheless remain related to the possibility of being built 
(“a bench would be excellent right  here …”). 
 This space—whether built (with the bench, correctly positioned) or potentially 
buildable—is intrinsically intersubjective. The space is intersubjective, not because 
there are others there who experience it with me, with whom I compare notes (I am 
alone on my walk); nor is it intersubjective because of the proxy presence of some-
one in the form of the bench, pointing at the view. That is, the space is built or build-
able not because it is the locus of an act of communication, actual or potential, or 
because one has here the resources for an expressive act that reveals that potential 
realized by placing a bench “at this spot.” If I had come upon a large sign with an 
arrow pointing towards the view, with the words “NICE VIEW” printed below, the 
space would not be revealed in the same manner as it is when the view is built from 
out of that placing of the bench; the space of signi ﬁ cation proper, even if we empha-
size the physicality of signs, is only a “built space” by analogy. 
289
17 Jan Patočka and Built Space
 There is instead a more fundamental sense of intersubjectivity that is essential 
here, or rather a  threefold sense. The space is intersubjective as something that has 
been (1)  lived through , (2)  understood , and (3)  shaped in such a way that embodies 
this understanding —and that this is something that has been accomplished  by 
others . This threefold sense cleaves close to the manner in which things bear the 
marks of the activities of others that can be re-constructed to explain why things are 
put together in such and such a way, but there is nevertheless an important phenom-
enological difference that we need to  ﬁ x more precisely. 
 First let us consider the intersubjectivity of this built-space of the view from the 
bench as something lived through by others. Here we should emphasize the global 
character of intersubjectivity: the presence of others in whose lived experiences 
things become manifest is a  total phenomenon for me, there is no element or dimen-
sion of the interest that I take in things that is not determined by the manner in which 
all things “of the world” are constituted in the experiences of multiple subjects. 12 
The space in which I move, the things that I deal with, always have the signi ﬁ cance 
of “for others” as a fundamental determinateness. Even alone on this path, things 
are what they are, the world is what it is, “for others” as well, whether actual or 
potential; the sense unity that things are qua worldly bears the sense of their being 
sustained by the intersubjective multiplicity of consciousness as a living unity. 
Likewise the built-space of the bench: even if the “one who” placed it there will 
forever remain anonymous, we both exist in a horizon of a world “for everyone.” 
 But that does not mean the whole world is built. For the bench to be placed, to 
orchestrate the view, requires that another understand its potential, or understand the 
possibility that that particular place offers “for a view.” An act of understanding lies 
at the origin of the built space; for it is only in an understanding, and not merely a 
living through (actual or potential), that the “here, not there” as a discernment of 
possibility is achieved. These two elements—living through and understanding—
are of course intertwined in a fundamental way; what is essential is not to separate 
them into two unrelated or contingently connected experiences, one in which some-
thing is conceived and the other “made available” to others. Intersubjectivity is not 
equivalent to “publicity”; what becomes manifest need not be announced, what is 
recognized need not be codi ﬁ ed. 
 The  ﬁ nal element is the shaping of the space in a way that embodies this under-
standing, or the realization of what is set into motion by its possibility. In our example, 
the catalyst is the placing of the bench. This shaping can take a more complex form, in 
which others themselves become gradually aware of the power of the possibility—
perhaps this has been a spot that people have returned to again and again for the 
view, for picnics or lovers’ meetings, for contemplation or meditation. The familiarity 
of the spot, and its view, something that had never come suddenly into the possession 
of anyone yet belongs gradually to everyone, can be understood as a proto-form 
of inhabiting the spot, one in which a buildable space takes shape in the repeated 
 12  See for example Husserl,  Ideas II, §51. 
290
J. Dodd
performances of the knowledge of what is possible “from here.” These performances 
realize the potential of the space as a place to “take in the view of the valley”; yet 
this gradual formation of local knowledge does not yet yield a built-space proper: 
the force of its manifestation is embodied only in the repeated actions of those who 
are in the know, who possess in an immediate sense the knowledge that articulates 
the possibilities of this space. The view of the valley, as it were, can shift back and 
forth between dormancy and the enlivened possibility of its manifestation being 
explicitly formed as a built-space proper. 
 To be built proper, I would suggest, is a formation of this space that embodies 
this knowledge of those who realized its potential and possibility in a form that can 
be experienced by those  who do not know , and who approach this knowledge as 
something alien to them—that is, across a distance marked not only by the possible, 
but by the presence of the other who knows and has shaped this place accordingly. 
It is this alien character that results, which originates in the distance that others are 
for us, that is essential to the sense of the space as built. There is a silence in built 
spaces across which the knowledge of others reaches us, from out of a distance that 
can belong only to them. If we know too much, or allow what we know of the others 
who build to command our re ﬂ ection by limiting us to the visible thing as an illus-
tration of what we know, then we risk overlooking the essential role of this silence 
in the phenomenality of built-space. Sitting on the bench, what the other understood 
in living the possibilities of this space are silently articulate in what unfolds in front 
of me; I take up temporary residence, as it were, in the mute understanding of the 
other that is present, embodied in what unfolds before me, but which is not my own, 
and which only speaks to me in the silent gesture of the lonely bench directing my 
gaze out over the magni ﬁ cent valley. Without this sensitivity to distance, without the 
realization that what we encounter in the space around us is not only the effects of 
what people have done but the very embodiment of what they understood (in the 
broad sense of Husserl’s  cogito —what they thought, felt, willed, suffered), we trap 
our re ﬂ ections in the narrow con ﬁ nes of a false proximity in which only a piece of 
the full breadth of the present-being of others is at play. 
 Second Dimension: Egoic and Personal Existence 
 The intersubjectivity of built-space circumscribes not only the emergence of such 
spaces “from others,” as systems of artifacts, but the very manner in which this space 
is encountered. But what do I have to do, or to be, in order to enter into such spaces? 
How is this engagement with the silent understanding of others at all possible? 
 Again consider the bench overlooking the view of the valley. In an important 
sense, what is at play here is an understanding that is not “my own,” yet this can 
have weight or value for me only if I come at it in a certain way, or from within a 
certain attitude. On one level, this is an attitude in which what I am interested in, or 
the manner in which I am concerned with things, takes form in accordance with an 
open relation to “others.” Yet on another level, even this openness to others, or an 
appreciation of the signi ﬁ cance of the transcendence of others, is something that 
291
17 Jan Patočka and Built Space
presupposes a certain kind of maturity of interest—I need to be experienced enough, 
or to have enough of a stake in something, to absorb the full import of what its 
“being available to others” can contribute. 
 This implies that the orchestration of the view becomes manifest to me only 
insofar as it gives me something that I am already in a sense looking for, as if it 
spoke to an interest. Were I rushing down the path, desperately attempting to avoid 
a pursuer, the built space crystallized around the park bench would not even exist 
“for me”—not because it is not there, but because I am not oriented properly to 
“enter” into it. The entrance into a space, its bare encounter as something there, is 
thus potentially a relatively complicated matter. A pile of rubble in Stalingrad, for a 
homeowner returning back after the war, offers the former inhabitant “no way in,” 
as well as no place to be. But for the soldier seeking cover during a pitched battle, 
desperate for something to slow down the progress of the invader, the same rubble 
beckons with ample opportunity for shelter. Landscapes are not literally carved by 
interests, but they are opened and made accessible by them. 
 What is important is to emphasize that the issue is not so much how I enter into 
or take up a position in space, as the fact that I need to  ﬁ rst inhabit myself in a 
particular manner in order for such relations to be possible at all. The I inhabits 
awareness, and pursues the possibilities of this habitation, in the form of the consti-
tution of a life de ﬁ ned by the gradual sedimentation of interests—of ways of being 
among beings that form the basis for the style and manner of a given existence. 
Alone, the intersubjective being of built-space lacks the resources to become 
manifest in consciousness unless the I takes an interest, or better:  is the interest on 
the basis of which the encounter with built-space is possible at all. 
 Imagine a group of friends arriving at the spot with the bench for a picnic, say the 
three students, one female and two male, from Lukacs’ dialogue in  Seele und Form . 
They are engrossed in a discussion about how to assess the literary signi ﬁ cance of 
Lawrence Stern, and are equally engrossed in the tensions that constitute an effec-
tive, if unacknowledged love triangle. The entire trip—from the walk to laying out 
the picnic to the enjoyment of the view—represents a manifold of opportunities for 
the conversation to shift, or a point to be made, a knowing glance or a false gesture 
to fall, all of which constitute a given,  ﬁ nite dynamic that unfolds within the space 
built by the placing of the bench. One might be tempted here to say that the scene 
represents the “animation” of an otherwise lonely place, giving it a life and purpose 
it would otherwise not have had; one might also have the opposite temptation, and 
insist that the ordering of the space itself anticipates the needs of the young triangle 
in conversation, thus animating  them with a view towards their own possibilities. 
Both would risk exaggeration. The question cannot simply devolve to which side, 
the conversation or the space, represents form and which matter; the question is 
instead primarily one of  access : how is built space accessible? 
 Part of the answer, I would argue, lies in the manner in which a human being 
accesses its own being, or has itself  in view . The question of form and matter in fact 
neatly folds into this question of access, which is embodied in relative, concretely 
lived decisions about what is important and not important. The very encounter with 
others across the built has the impact it does because, as subjects, we are invested in 
our interests, and thereby have ourselves in view. 
292
J. Dodd
 Something else goes with this. Having ourselves in view also means that we are 
committed to something that is open to being changed. This implies in turn that our 
interests, as the manner in which we inhabit ourselves, are fundamentally  fragile in 
nature. When I sit down on the bench, my interest in such things as the view of a 
beautiful valley is taken up by the built space, given an articulation in light of the 
knowledge of the other embodied in that space. To be sure, the space is what it is 
only because of the interest; but that does not negate the sense in which the interest 
is interpreted by the space. I do not come to such spaces to be understood in terms 
of my interest, but in order to seek in the space the further progression of potential 
development and maturation of the interest. If so, then it would be misleading to say 
that the view is orchestrated by the other, as if the one who built this space were able 
to call forth those patterns of manifestation that are in the end dependent on my own 
being in order to emerge at all. The distance that the other represents to me is 
matched by the distance that I represent for the other who builds—what the built-
space is to be in an experience that can only be mine is in the end an impenetrable 
determinant of the very phenomenality of the space itself. 
 If the space—understood as the embodied knowledge of the other, in the sense 
introduced above—opens up room for the pursuit of what it is that I am invested in, 
then in a speci ﬁ c way I also become invested in the space itself, thereby literally 
 feeding its visibility. Accordingly, this space achieves a kind of stability and perma-
nence of phenomenality in the form of a uniquely  intersubjective visibility . What is 
visible here is an intersubjective anticipation of the ful ﬁ llment of my interest. Built-
space is something that beckons me as the manifestation of a successful future in the 
pursuit of who I am, a future that is present in the form of the understanding of 
others embodied built-space. In entering into the built space I enter into the space of 
an understanding embodied in the world itself, a lasting, visible habitation of 
humans among things that seems to have transcended the struggle to inhabit itself, 
and which sets itself before me as a realization of what I am not yet, but strive to be. 
There is thus a  hope  at issue in built spaces, one that should not be underestimated.  
 Third Dimension: The Body 
 At this point one might have the suspicion that the  built character of built space is 
something of a “higher level” determination of objectivity—perhaps, for example, 
comparable to the notion of a “cultural objectivity” that cannot be reduced to rela-
tions pertaining among “objects of nature.” The idea thus suggests itself that built 
space proper is constituted on the levels of the ego and community of egos, thus is 
not a phenomenon that forms on the most basic level of bodily oriented perception. 
 Such a thesis would be in error, for a number of reasons. First the more obvious: 
there are too many features and characteristics of the built environment that are 
clearly presentive-kinaesthetic that would stand in the way of such a reduction. Take 
for example the sensuous aspect of mass, so central for the political or memorial 
interest pursued in the construction of monuments; or the lightness or grace of structures 
293
17 Jan Patočka and Built Space
that seem to “ ﬂ oat” in the air, as a buttress for an interest in a style of communal 
existence that emphasizes speed and  ﬂ uidity; or the role of the  vast in the potential 
for a built space to be the site of a  spectacle . Take again our example of sitting on 
the bench: the very orchestration of the view is a function of the placement of my 
body as a freely moved perceptual organ; and in turn the “knowledge” of the other 
embodied in the site is as much a bodily comprehension of possible movements as 
an intellectual grasp of a schematic interpretation of the dynamics of the positioning 
of the bench—perhaps it is the former even more than the latter. Once we stop think-
ing of the body as a stimulus-response circuit, and instead see it as the manner in 
which the perceptual situation of an embodied being is manifest in experience, the 
more we realize that its structures must be deeply engrained in the phenomenon of 
built space. 
 This is even true when we focus on simple perception. What is important about 
sensuous perception for phenomenologists like Husserl (and Patočka) is that it 
represents a primordial accomplishment of sense constitution that is never super-
seded in its essence by any other “level” or strata, no matter how complex. This is 
because sensuous perception accomplishes two things that are the absolute ground 
of the experience of the world itself:  ﬁ rst, it gives or presents things in an originary 
fashion; second, it does so in terms of a coming together of elements that constitute 
linkages, paths of sense development that do not move  away from things, but 
progressively  towards things, in a kind of descent of determinateness, as is described 
so acutely by Husserl in  Erfahrung und Urteil . Sense perception constitutes a world 
as something originarily present to us as that towards which we are directed, towards 
which we are  moving . This means that the very theme of “approach,” of “entering” 
into a built space, already presupposes the original accomplishments of perceptual 
life—perception forms the phenomenological, presentational basis for any sense 
of “approach,” it is the threshold phenomenon  par excellence . This fundamental 
structure of all situatedness is never replaced; it is either referred to by all other 
sense accomplishments, or it is imitated. The more I understand something, thus 
come closer to it as something known, the more I am just developing that initial 
“towards which” of intentional directedness accomplished by originary perception. 
It is because of this that Husserl refers to sense perception as “originary consciousness” 
( Originalbewusstsein ); and it is why perception is always present, even if in the 
form of a shadow of itself. 
 Take for example architectural drawings. 13 Here we are no longer talking about 
built space directly, but about a technique developed within a practical discipline, 
architecture, which is also in multiple respects a theoretical discipline. Both come 
together in architectural drawings. Such drawings are, from a phenomenological 
perspective, extremely sophisticated; they develop and explore schemas that are as 
much informed and governed by ideas and abstractions as by actual perception. 
They can be informative and useful, even if they represent something that can never 
 13  I have to thank for inspiration on this topic Parviz Mohassel’s Ph.D. dissertation, “Husserl: 
Phenomenology and Architectural Drawings,” New School for Social Research 2009. 
294
J. Dodd
be actually perceived “in the world,” or for that matter “built”—such as the suprematist 
explorations of form in the architectural paintings of Zaha Hadid. In every disorient-
ing break of line, every hyper-stylized repetition of forms or planar displacement of 
orders and directions—in all this the originary “presentive” function of sensibility 
retains its shadow—even the body, which as kinaesthetic organ is just the movement 
of the given plenitude out towards the hope of a determinacy. However abstract and 
intellectualized, the originary achievements of perception are nevertheless present; 
even their marginalization is the result of what they have accomplished as a source 
of meaning: after all, their very essence directs intentionality beyond themselves, 
towards ever more complex patterns of arriving at what is intended. Just as we need 
to move away from conceiving of the body as a stimulus-response circuit, we also 
need to move away from the conception of perception as a kind of naïve, subjective 
“picture” of the world, and instead recognize it as the condition for the possibility 
of the very  complication of sense and meaning. 
 Conclusion 
 I noted above that a salient aspect of Patočka’s thought was an emphasis on incarnate 
being as an axis of phenomenological investigation. It also bears remembering that, 
in his mature philosophy, Patočka conceived of incarnate existence in terms of pat-
terns of movement—that is, the movements of rootedness, of the opening of history, 
and of philosophical existence. I would argue that the phenomenology of built-
space, sketched above in what is more a series of suggestions than a system, has the 
potential to be an important supplement to Patočka’s account of the movements of 
human existence, and with that perhaps also take a modest step towards a genuine 
philosophy of  architecture . 
295
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_18, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Juridical Thinkers Took the First Step 
 In Portugal as in Brazil, the  ﬁ rst dialogue with Husserl’s phenomenology and, 
in particular, with the themes and theses in  Ideen , happened in philosophy of law. 
The very  ﬁ rst scholar who introduced Edmund Husserl’s concepts and methods was 
Luís Cabral de Moncada (1888–1974), Full Professor at the University of Coimbra, 
Portugal. 1 The positivist wave in the  ﬁ rst decades of the twentieth century sup-
pressed the studies of philosophy of law in the Portuguese university. The return to 
those studies in the late 1920s and 1930s was due to Moncada. In his studies of 
philosophy of law, he was strongly in ﬂ uenced by neo-Kantianism, particularly Emil 
Lask, and also by Max Scheler, Nicolai Hartmann, and Husserl. 
 Opposing positivism, Moncada aimed to free the science of law from psychology 
and sociology. His main tenet was that the science of law was an apriori science, 
and that this apriori science was about what ought to be, not about what simply is. 
 Chapter 18 
 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking 
Community 
 Pedro  M. S.  Alves and  Carlos  A.  Morujão   
 P. M. S.  Alves (*)
 Department of Philosophy, University of Lisbon ,  Lisbon ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  psalves2@gmail.com 
 C. A.  Morujão 
 Department of Philosophy, Portuguese Catholic University ,  Lisbon ,  Portugal 
 Alves is responsible for the entire sections “Juridical Thinkers Took the First Step” and “Some 
Glimpses Beyond”, and, concerning sections “ Philosophers Came Second: The Rise of the 
Phenomenological School of Coimbra” and “Mature Readings”, for the presentations of Barbosa 
and Soveral (in section “ Philosophers Came Second: The Rise of the Phenomenological School of 
Coimbra”), and of Fragata, Gil and Saraiva (in section “Mature Readings”). C. Morujão is the 
author of the presentations of A. Morujão and Fraga, in section “Philosophers Came Second: The 
Rise of the Phenomenological School of Coimbra”, and of Paisana, in section “Mature Readings”. 
 1  Luís Cabral de Moncada, Do Valor e Sentido da Democracia. Ensaio de Filoso ﬁ a Política, 
Coimbra:  Boletim da Faculdade de Direito , vol. 12, 1930. 
296
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
As a neo-Kantian, he stressed that law discloses a domain of prescriptions that command 
in an unconditioned, absolute way. Nevertheless and contrary to all formalisms, 
he also stressed that there was still a substantial basis for this science of what ought 
to be. This basis was the material realm of values. For him, the knowledge of values 
must secure the normative content of the juridical norm, i.e., axiology secures law 
and gives to it an absolute foundation. 
 Approaching the knowledge of values as foundational to the institution of 
norms, Moncada turned to the Husserlian method of  Wesensschau . This was, in 
fact, one of the greatest impacts the  Ideen  had on his general theory of law: to turn 
axiology into a descriptive, apriori science of the  experience of values. Another 
major impact was the phenomenological analysis of the content of those acts that 
are directed to the non-substantial, non-natural, non-empirical realm of law as 
such. Classical phenomenology was chie ﬂ y concerned with acts that were being-
intentions, i.e., with the analysis of doxic acts. Through the analysis of the inten-
tional acts in which law is intended, Moncada aimed to turn phenomenology to the 
analysis of “nomic” acts, so to speak, i.e., to the analysis of the operations in which 
consciousness constitutes not “what is,” but the “ought to do” injunction, along 
with values and norms. 
 In the realization of this program, Moncada employs—not always in a accurate 
way—several of the most important concepts and methods of the  Ideen: noetic and 
noematic analysis, intentionality, immanence, transcendence, constitution, formal 
and material essences, and so on. He stresses the possibilities opened up by the 
method of eidetic variation, but he never makes use of the method of transcendental 
reduction. Rather, in his last essays he emphasizes that eidetic phenomenology, 
being concerned only with possibilities and ignoring the realm of facts, cannot 
address the scienti ﬁ c study of positive law. In the end, Husserlian phenomenology, 
which he introduced systematically in the philosophy of law since the 1930s, was 
only, for him, a preparatory step towards a fully  ﬂ edged science of law as an historical 
formation in human culture. 
 Meanwhile, in Brazil, Miguel Reale (1910–2006), another philosopher of law 
and also Full Professor at the University of São Paulo, incorporated phenomenology 
in his celebrated “three-dimensional theory of law.” The “three-dimensional” theory 
states that law is always a con ﬂ ation of fact, value, and norm. Addressing what he 
sees as a “dialectical relationship” between these three dimensions, he stresses that 
law as norm comes from a previous evaluation of facts of the social and cultural 
world. Trying to understand this process of a “pre-categorical” experience of law, 
which is, for him, the very origin of the normative objecti ﬁ cation of law (by means 
of the state) that gives a positive content to the science of law, he emphasizes both 
its pre-theoretical and historical character. In this context, Reale sees in the 
Husserlian concept of  Lebenswelt the “great discovery” of phenomenology, and 
talks about a “juridical  Lebenswelt,” meaning the concrete experiences that give rise 
to the later establishment of positive law by means of the activity of the legislator. 
As he puts it in “Estruturas e Modelos do Direito”, “It seems to me that the Husserlian 
concept of  Lebenswelt  is very useful both in the study of the genesis of juridical rules, 
and in the study of its semantic modi ﬁ cations. … The analysis of the pre-categorical 
297
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
juridical experience is essential to the full comprehension of law, in order to settle 
its relationship to juridical institutions that represent, in the normative realm, forms 
under which social conduct and actions are objecti ﬁ ed.” 2 
 Focused on the late Husserlian concept of  Lebenswelt, Reale dedicates a full chapter 
to the phenomenology of the  Ideen in his book  Filoso ﬁ a do Direito . He recognizes the 
richness of eidetic and transcendental reductions and stresses its wide applications to 
several domains outside philosophy. Nevertheless, he intends to block what he sees as 
an idealistic turn in  Ideen. He states, using the intentionality as a guiding thread, 
Husserl sought to return from the transcendent object to its noematic content, and, in 
a  ﬁ nal and controversial step, to a self-re ﬂ ection in which consciousness exposes itself 
as absolute subjectivity. Contrary to this last endeavor, Reale argues,  ﬁ rst, that the 
subject-object polarization is an ultimate one, and, second, that phenomenology must 
catch its objects in the cultural world of  Lebenswelt and return back to the original 
institutions of meaning that constitute them. He displays here a Hegelian model of the 
anamnesis of the experiences of consciousness, combining it with a genetic approach 
to the original institutions and deposits of meaning. As he writes: “The subjective 
re ﬂ ection must show the essential correlation between subject and object, and, there-
fore, the inconceivability of a transcendental ego without reference to objects and to 
the world in which they are situated. … This is the reason why I say that phenomeno-
logical re ﬂ ection culminates in a historic-axiological re ﬂ ection, in which the subject 
recognizes itself as re ﬂ ected in his own spiritual objecti ﬁ cations, the authentic mean-
ing of which must be carried out to its original roots, unveiling its founding intention-
ality” 3 in a concrete and historical subjectivity. 
 Another philosopher of law, Aquiles Guimarães (1937–), Full Professor at the 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pursued these hints and developed, in a some-
what reactive fashion, a vindication of Husserl’s idealistic transcendental philosophy. 
As he puts it, transcendental and eidetic reductions,  ﬁ rst fully presented by Husserl in 
the  Ideen, are the only theoretical stance that can free the science of law from positiv-
ism, with its narrow understanding of the phenomenon of law as the bare realm of the 
posited rules of a factual legislative system. Returning from the factuality of norms to 
the “law phenomenon” and to the eidetic intuition of law as such, phenomenological 
description can show the strata of sense involved in the juridical world. Guimarães 
stresses that the nucleus of law consists in an “emotional apriori,” different from the 
rational apriori of mathematics and logic. As a result, he asserts that there is a “pure 
intuition of values,” and that values are objective formations that sustain an “axiological 
objectivism.” Law is, for him, disclosed as a “regional ontology” of the inter-subjec-
tive and cultural world regulated by the supreme value of “juridicity.” 
 Regarding philosophy of law, Guimarães continues as a leading personality in 
Brazil. His full acceptance of Husserlian phenomenology gave rise to a school of 
juridical and phenomenological studies at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. 
 2  “Estruturas e Modelos do Direito no Processo Cultural”,  in Teoria Tridimensional do Direito. 
Teoria da Justiça. Fontes e Modelos do Direito (Lisboa: IN-CM, 2003), 110. 
 3  Filoso ﬁ a do Direito. (São Paulo: Editora Saraiva, 1983), 12th edn., 365. 
298
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
He published several books on the subject, for instance,  Fenomenologia e Direito , 4 
 Fenomenologia e Direitos Humanos , 5  Cinco Lições de Filoso ﬁ a do Direito . 6 He is 
also the editor of the journal  Fenomenologia e Direito, where research in the  ﬁ eld is 
regularly published. 
 Philosophers Came Second: The Rise of the Phenomenological 
School of Coimbra 
 In the area of philosophy, the  ﬁ rst dialogue with the  Ideen began a few years later, 
with a work published in 1947 by Miranda Barbosa (1916–1973), Full Professor at 
the University of Coimbra, Portugal, titled  A Essência do Conhecimento . 7 In this 
work, Barbosa expressed a far-reaching critique of the very foundations of transcen-
dental phenomenology. A little less than two decades after the publication of 
Barbosa’s work, an essay by his student Abraches Soveral gave a phenomenological 
rejoinder to the critiques developed in that essay. At the same time, Alexandre 
Morujão and Gustavo de Fraga dedicated themselves to phenomenology at Coimbra, 
also under the motivation of Barbosa. Therefore, although he was not a phenome-
nologist, but rather a critic of phenomenology, Barbosa is at the origin of the 
Coimbra school of phenomenology. 
 In order to understand the kind of philosophical problems discussed in the context 
of the  Ideen , it will be necessary to give a brief account of Barbosa’s critical positions 
in  A Essência do Conhecimento . The work is divided into an Analytic and a Dialectic. 
The similarity with the Kantian partitions is, however, misleading. Firstly, because 
Barbosa’s Analytic is not preceded (nor followed) by an Aesthetics, that is, by a 
theory of intuition; secondly, because the very concept of Analytic is de ﬁ ned, by 
Barbosa, not as a logic of truth, as in Kant, but as a logical analysis of thought, which 
is as a kind of formal semantics, de ﬁ ning what is understood by concept, objective 
content, general and singular concept, ideosphere, etc.; thirdly, because Barbosas’s 
Dialectic is not, as in Kant, a doctrine of the appearance of truth, but rather attempts 
to provide an answer to what he de ﬁ nes as the  essential problem of knowledge . As it 
is explicitly formulated by him, “ The essential problem of knowledge consists in 
questioning  what  knowledge  is , i.e., in investigating what knowledge is, or not, and 
what it intentionally  seems to be in the phenomenon of knowledge.” 8  
 For Barbosa, there are some ideas that appear so obvious they are never explicitly 
discussed. The  ﬁ rst is that what he calls logic—but which is really more of a formal 
semantics than what we understand by logic today—can show that concepts refer to 
 4  Fenomenologia e Direito (Rio de Janeiro: Lúmen Júris, 2005). 
 5  Fenomenologia e Direitos Humanos (Rio de Janeiro: Lúmen Júris, 2007). 
 6  Cindo Lições de Filoso ﬁ a do Direito (Rio de Janeiro: Lúmen Júris: 2007). 
 7  A Essência do Conhecimento, in Obras Filosó ﬁ cas (Lisboa: IN-CM), 221–385. 
 8  Idem, p. 331. 
299
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
objects, but is not able to demonstrate that the objects to which the concepts refer 
actually exist. Logic, therefore, does not solve, but rather raises a gnoseological 
problem. In his own words: “The pure analysis of the formal object … can never 
prove the actual existence of entities. What could assure existence would be only the 
“intentional reference” of the concept to the object, but, precisely because that refer-
ence is “intentional,” it cannot provide real transcendence to the objective sphere.” 9 
 The second idea is that the transcendental attitude is both provisional and 
insuf ﬁ cient. In fact, for Barbosa, the transcendental attitude does not consist in the 
elaboration of a new concept of reality which could overcome the dispute between 
realism and idealism, as Husserl supposed, but consists only in a methodical opera-
tion used to analyze the connection between the thought and the thought-of objec-
tivity, an analysis in which the ontological status of the objects is left undetermined. 
The transcendental attitude is, therefore, for Barbosa, not an answer to but rather a 
suspension of the Essential Problem of Knowledge. As he elaborates in a passage of 
his book: “The position of the object in relation to thought can be determined as 
 immanent, transcendent or  transcendental . … To raise the problem of the essence 
of knowledge seems to be no more than to formulate this question: which of those 
positions does the object occupy in relation to thought? As we can see, the transcen-
dental option is immediately eliminated …. In fact, the transcendental position of 
the object is already a logical minimum given by the cognitive phenomenon and it 
is that situation which raises the question of the immanence or transcendence of the 
object. … To say that the object is  transcendental  is no more than to suspend judg-
ment about its transcendence, and it is precisely this logical indeterminacy that one 
wants to abolish when moving to the  ﬁ eld of theory of knowledge, eventually reaching 
a conclusion about whether the object is  immanent or  transcendent or, in other 
words, whether the object  exists or  does not exist ‘in itself’”. 10 
 The third idea is that there are grounds regarding knowledge to distinguish between 
descriptive and substantive questions. In fact, the phenomenon of knowledge  seems to 
be  the seizing of an external reality. But is it  really so  or will we have to classify it as 
an illusion by showing that the object that is given in knowledge is, in fact, immanent 
to the act of knowing and exists only as a correlate of that act? Such are the problems 
which, for Barbosa, should be raised against merely descriptive questions. And it is 
exactly in the con ﬂ ation of these two problems, or rather in the belief that descriptive 
questions exhaust substantive questions, that Barbosa sees the main mistake of phe-
nomenology: “It is in this point that Husserl and his students greatly erred, in supposing 
that to describe is to solve and to consider that the description of the phenomenon [of 
knowledge] is already the solution to its essential problem.”  11  
 His critical stand regarding phenomenology is therefore very clear. It can be 
summarized in the three following tenets:
 1st  Denial of Fundamentality . The fundamental  ﬁ eld of philosophy is a formal semantics 
(a “logic,” as he says) that describes the atomic structure of concepts and the 
 9  Idem, p. 339. 
 10  Idem, p. 341. 
 11  Idem, p. 331. 
300
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
relation between the meaning content and the objectivity referred to via that 
content, without taking a stand about the essential problem of knowledge, and 
without referring to the life of a conscious subjectivity. In the author’s own words, 
the fundamental philosophical discipline is logic and not phenomenology.  
 2nd  Report of a mistake . The phenomenological description of knowledge closes 
itself within the transcendental  ﬁ eld and within the relationship between 
intentional act and intended object. Therefore, for that very same reason, 
phenomenology cannot be an answer to the essential gnoseological problem. 
 3rd  Attribution of an incapacity . Given its methodological orientation, phenomenology 
does not allow for the formulation of the fundamental problem about the real 
existence of the object of knowledge; for this reason, phenomenology, at the very 
moment it believes it has described the essential laws of knowledge, is really 
only describing what knowledge  seems to be and not what it  actually is , a question 
for which phenomenology has no answer at all. 
 Eighteen years after the publication of Barbosa’s essay, Abranches de Soveral 
(1927–2003) wrote the following regarding the Essential Problem of Knowledge: 
“These considerations aim at a determination of the philosophical value of the phe-
nomenological method in light of this problematic [i.e. the essential problem of 
knowledge].” 12 It couldn’t be any clearer that his dialogue with phenomenology is 
entirely determined by the questions previously raised by Barbosa. Those are pre-
cisely the questions which give meaning—and, we should say, a  non-phenomenolog-
ical meaning—to Soveral’s attempt to reformulate the Essential Problem of Knowledge 
within phenomenology. This reformulation is apparently accomplished through the 
use of some core phenomenological concepts. It appears as follows: “The essential 
problem of knowledge … consists in knowing whether the intentional object to which 
all knowledge refers to is immanent or not to the subject who thinks it.” 13  
 In comparing this formulation with Barbosa’s, one could think that everything is 
now characterized using phenomenological concepts, namely, through “being 
immanent” and “transcendent reality,” although Barbosa had already used them, 
while in a strictly ontological sense. However, it is not entirely exact to say that 
there is here a phenomenological reformulation of the problem, because, as Barbosa 
had correctly pointed out, the Essential Problem of Knowledge cannot be enunci-
ated within phenomenology. In fact, from the perspective of phenomenology, it is a 
pseudo-problem, while, from the theoretical perspective of Barbosa, it is the true 
major problem of all investigation about knowledge. The result was a tension 
between phenomenology and theory of knowledge, as Barbosa often noted. 
 Soveral is well aware of this tense relationship between phenomenology and the 
Essential Problem of Knowledge. He tries to settle it by distinguishing three different 
“phases” in Husserlian phenomenology: the  ﬁ rst where “the essential problem of 
knowledge is initially not considered,” the second where “it is considered that the 
 12  O Método Fenomenológico. Estudo para a Determinação do seu Valor Filosó ﬁ co, 1. Valor do 
Método para a Filoso ﬁ a (Porto, 1965), 156. 
 13  Idem, p. 33, note 24, see also p. 47. 
301
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
essential problem has been overcome and no longer makes sense in the transcendental 
sphere,” and  ﬁ nally, the third, in which “the transcendental reduction is not prac-
ticed,” but in which, on the other hand, “the demands of the essential problem of 
knowledge are taken into consideration.” 14 The  ﬁ rst phase refers to eidetic phenom-
enology. The second is, for Soveral, the version of phenomenology started in 1907 
and developed in  Ideen . Regarding the third phase, which would be the version of 
phenomenology most appropriate for a dialogue with Barbosa’s gnoseological 
questions, Soveral, revealingly, recognizes that while it is a version pertaining to the 
“early stages” of phenomenology—but not to be confused with eidetic phenome-
nology—it  ﬁ nds its expression chie ﬂ y in the work of Nicolai Hartmann. Therefore, 
it is as if the Essential Problem of Knowledge did not have another intersection with 
phenomenology then the work of an author such as Hartmann, who used phenom-
enology in the wider context of a “metaphysics of knowledge,” which is quite dif-
ferent from transcendental phenomenology  sensu stricto . 
 The attempt to bring the Essential Problem of Knowledge to phenomenology 
demands the task of developing a completely innovative formulation of that problem, 
 ﬁ rst relatively to Barbosa’s own formulation, and second to phenomenology itself. 
 A brief analysis of Soveral’s reformulation can show where his endeavors brought 
him. In relation to Barbosa, the focus is no longer placed on  thought and the relation 
of thought to its object, as Barbosa had done by using the concept of “thought” not 
in a psychological sense but in a logical-semantic one. On the contrary, the focus is 
now placed on the subject and his act, in a broad psychological and real sense. 
Soveral does not ask, as Barbosa does, if knowledge is what it seems to be, but 
rather if the object is immanent to the subject who thinks it. This modi ﬁ cation is not 
unimportant because it gives a subjective-psychological accent to a problematic 
which, for Barbosa, was strictly “logical” and gnoseological. This difference is 
assumed by Soveral in a long note in which he explains himself in respect to his 
teacher. He concludes: “we relate the immanence and transcendence of the object to 
the subject of knowledge; Barbosa refers both to the thought itself.” 
 Concerning phenomenology, even if dressed with the phenomenological concepts 
of intentionality, immanence, and transcendence, the Essential Problem of Knowledge 
can only be formulated when one imposes on phenomenology a questionnaire which is 
alien or at least peripheral to it. For the transcendental phenomenology of the  Ideen , 
there is no place for the question whether, somewhere behind the reality scrutinized by 
the meaning-intentions of a constituting transcendental life, there is still a reality in 
itself which would be similar to it. Reality is the object of the consciousness of reality. 
And the consciousness of reality is described by the phenomenology of reason. A con-
cept such as “absolute reality,” independent of any relation to a constituting intentional-
ity, makes no good sense for the phenomenology of the  Ideen . The problem here posed 
to phenomenology is, therefore, an extra-phenomenological one. And it is precisely in 
this departure from the transcendental and idealist problematic of  Ideen  that Soveral’s 
thought would later develop at Oporto University, were he was Full Professor. 
 14  Idem, pp. 37–38. 
302
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
 Alexandre Morujão (1922–2009) was for about four decades professor at the 
Faculty of Letters at Coimbra. His undergraduate thesis,  A Doutrina da 
Intencionalidade na Fenomenologia de Husserl , 15  is characterized by an approach 
to phenomenology in terms which are not exactly the ones we  ﬁ nd in later works by 
the same author, but which can be placed alongside the—almost contemporary—
approaches by Júlio Fragata or Gustavo de Fraga. His thesis is concerned with test-
ing the limits of phenomenology; that is, more than showing where phenomenology 
has not gone, he is mostly interested in showing where it can never go, given its 
starting point. 
 Therefore, in  A Doutrina da Intencionalidade , phenomenology—as it appears in 
 Ideen —is presented as being simultaneously a re ﬂ ection oriented towards objects, 
“in order to discover them as a component of lived experiences,” and as a question-
ing about the nature of subjectivity, which would “represent what in traditional 
philosophical conceptions corresponds to the Absolute.” Morujão, in his interpreta-
tion of Husserl’s 1913 work,  ﬁ nds at least three problematic points in the attempt to 
raise subjectivity to the Absolute: (i) an ambiguity in the explanation of the relation 
between the empirical-psychological Ego and the transcendental Ego; (ii) an 
insuf ﬁ ciency in the explanation of the meaning of reason that lies beneath the notion 
of intentionality, making phenomenology, contrary to the grand systems of classical 
rationalism, a philosophy which explains the  ﬁ nite by the  ﬁ nite, integrating the 
“imperfection” of objects—since they are only given in adumbrations—in the very 
process of their constitution; and (iii) a refusal of ontology despite the several onto-
logical implications contained in the doctrine of intentionality, thus reducing phe-
nomenology to an egology or, even worse, “to a Cogito limited to a subjectivity 
without exteriority,” due to the absence of a transcendent being that may give to it 
real density. 
 In his later work  Mundo e Intencionalidade , 16 Morujão fully addresses the main 
themes of the  Ideen . Among them, the nature and scope of the  epochē , objects con-
sidered only as intentional formations of consciousness, the reductions, the world as 
phenomenon, the noetic-noematic correlation, and the relationship between noema 
and object. It is also in this book that the question concerning the relationship 
between Husserl and Descartes is raised. Morujão emphasizes the instrumental 
aspect of the Cartesian doubt in order to explain the  epochē , but he also shows that 
the Cartesian path is not the best in order to grant access to the phenomenological 
attitude. Here the author points to well-known passages in Husserl’s  Erste 
Philosophie II . As he puts it, If the  epochē is the ground upon which one can estab-
lish philosophy as a rigorous science, if, as uninterested spectator, I can disconnect 
“from the existence and consistency of the perceived object and from the existence 
of the world in general,” this is because there is a disinterested Ego who observes 
the Ego which is engaged in the world, transforming it in a theme for re ﬂ ection and 
preserving all the content of it. Therefore, if some texts from the  Ideen present a 
 15  A Doutrina da Intencionalidade na Fenomenologia de Husserl (Coimbra: Universidade de 
Coimbra, 1955). 
 16  Mundo e Intencionalidade , Coimbra, Universidade de Coimbra, 1961. 
303
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
notion of consciousness similar to the Cartesian one, based on an abrupt split 
between the pure and the natural (psychological) Ego, this is because they belong to 
an initial stage of Husserl’s formulation of the method of  epochē , where the method 
of Cartesian doubt was adopted as a guideline. 
 Numerous texts of Husserl’s last phase correct the account of reduction in his 
 Ideen . According to Morujão, phenomenology there established itself immediately 
in the transcendental ego thanks to the  epochē , through a reinforcement of the 
Cartesian doubt, but it is dif ﬁ cult to understand how, from a negative de ﬁ nition of 
consciousness as “phenomenological residue,” one can obtain a new kind of funda-
mental science. This position starts being corrected in the  Cartesianische 
Meditationen , where the point of departure is a concrete consciousness. The starting 
point becomes the  cogitatum  rather than the cogito; the former introduces the latter 
and not the contrary. But it is in  Erfahrung und Urteil  and in §53 of  Die Krisis that 
the  cogitatum can be interpreted not only as a pre-given world, with all its signi ﬁ cative 
structures and intra-mundane sciences, but also as a life-world. Particularly in 
 Erfahrung und Urteil, Husserl explains that the  epochē is performed, in fact, in two 
separate moments:  ﬁ rst as the return from the pre-given world, with all its meaning 
sedimentations and scienti ﬁ c determinations, to the primordial life-world; and sec-
ondly, as a regressive questioning into the subjective operations of consciousness. In 
this way are clari ﬁ ed the ontological implications of phenomenology, which already 
concerned Morujão in his  ﬁ rst book . In fact, once the  epochē  is performed, phenom-
enology cannot present itself as a pure method. Phenomenology needs to know 
something about the ontological structure of what was made an object of reduction, 
so that it may ensure the validity of the descriptive procedures it is putting in use. 
However, the intuitionism of phenomenology is characterized by a permanent 
wavering between a “seeing that gives the object” and a “seeing which constitutes it.” 
What guides the understanding of the subjective functions is the object perceived 
and it can only appear in the horizon of the world; that means, however, that the 
constitutive origin of the world, as Husserl understands it, will always escape the 
phenomenological regard. This conclusion of phenomenology will hence, according 
to Morujão, demand a speculative reappraisal. 
 Gustavo de Fraga (1922–2003) was a professor at the University of Coimbra, 
where he also completed his PhD with a dissertation titled  De Husserl a Heidegger . 17 
The main theme of his investigations concerning Husserl is the relation between 
phenomenology and metaphysics, and this theme determines the angle of his 
approach to the problematic of the  Ideen . Although the author recognizes some 
justi ﬁ cation in the attempt to eliminate any relation between metaphysical idealism 
and phenomenology, by making the latter a mere method, he also observes that this 
would mean a change in its effective course. The truth is that phenomenology’s 
metaphysical implications are immediately present in the relation, albeit tense, 
between the doctrine of intentionality and the teleology of consciousness, that is, in 
the postulation of an Absolute prior to all evidence. In Husserl, therefore, the theory 
 17  De Husserl a Heidegger. Elementos para uma Problemática da Fenomenologia , in  Biblos XL 
(1954), pp. 1–260. 
304
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
of reduction does not culminate in a divinization of subjectivity, although at times it 
does seem his idealism would lead to it, but rather to an opening of the Ego, via 
re ﬂ ection, to an unbounded interiority of an Augustinian brand—which is quite 
clear in the relations between subjectivity and time–, the metaphysical consequences 
of which Husserl intended to investigate in later manuscripts. Supported by texts 
from the Manuscripts E III 9 and E III 10, Fraga  ﬁ nds in Husserl the recognition of 
a universal absolute will living in subjects, which opens them to an irrational only 
accessible through faith. Subjectivity is, therefore, the path to the Absolute. 
Suspending not only the thesis of the world, but also of the unity of an empirical-
psychological Ego interested in the world, the reduction departs from the factual 
Ego and reaches a free, boundless Ego. 
 According to Fraga, the static analysis of the  Ideen  is surpassed by the discovery 
of immanent temporality. Some interpreters of Husserl, such as Landgrebe, led, 
since very early, the interpretation of Husserl’s philosophy to a point which is com-
mon today. The evolution in Husserl’s thought can be retraced, globally, in three 
phases: (1) a  ﬁ rst phase marked by the return to acts in which ideal unities of meaning 
are constituted; (2) a second one characterized by the constitution of those acts as 
immanent temporal unities; and (3) a third,  ﬁ nally, characterized by the self-consti-
tution of the temporal  ﬂ ow of consciousness. 
 In this way, the path leads from an “I” conceived as the “phenomenological residue 
of  Weltvernichtung” and as transcendence in immanence, to an “I” as a temporal  ﬂ ux 
of lived experiences and, beyond this last one—and also beyond the problematic of 
 Ideen— to an non-temporal  Ur-Ich , “an originary present that is not a modality of 
time,” from which the  ﬂ ux of time arises, as well as the transcendences  ﬂ owing in 
it. Supporting his analyses with the Husserlian C-Manuscripts, Fraga notes that this 
pure I is the origin of time, but is outside time. Time is founded upon a present 
which is not in time, because it is from it that time comes out. It is a living-present, 
similar to the  nunc stans (to the “what always is”) which, according to Augustine, 
characterizes God’s way of being. It is in this fashion, via time, that, according to 
Fraga, Husserl follows the path of metaphysics towards the absolute. 
 Mature Readings 
 Júlio Fragata (1920–1985), an in ﬂ uential teacher at the University of Braga, 
Portugal, was a Jesuit who studied theology with Karl Rahner S.J. and presented, 
a few years later (1954), at the Gregorian University, Rome, a Ph. D. Thesis titled 
 A Fenomenologia de Husserl como Fundamento da Filoso ﬁ a , then published in 
1959. 18 His philosophical background in all his life-long dialogue with Husserl was 
Neo-Thomism, with its nonnegotiable realistic stance. 
 18  A Fenomenologia de Husserl como Fundamento da Filoso ﬁ a (Braga: Livraria Cruz, 1959). 
305
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
 Since his early works, Fragata critically considered the purpose of phenomenology 
to be the radical realization of the idea of scienti ﬁ city, as Husserl aimed for when he 
presented his philosophy as a “science free of presuppositions.” The phenomeno-
logical reduction of  Ideen  is presented by Fragata as a methodological device con-
veying an idealism which is only “unreal and methodic”; this idealism is appropriate 
to ful ﬁ ll the goal of a  ﬁ rst philosophy as a science of things as they are known, but, 
at its core, it is still compatible with an ontological realism: “Husserl’s idealism may 
be considered methodic,” “The originality of the  epochē is precisely that it makes an 
idealism possible without contradicting realism.” 19 
 In light of this con ﬂ ation between his own realism and the interpretation of 
 Ideen’s idealism as merely methodic, very early in his work Fragata breaks with 
Husserl’s idea that the phenomenological-transcendental questions exhaust the  ﬁ eld 
of philosophical questions. Fragata’s re ﬂ exive efforts will therefore aim to show 
that the return to the natural attitude is not only inevitable within philosophy, but 
also that only in this attitude can one arrive at the absolutely radical philosophical 
questions. 
 This break with Husserl’s idea of phenomenology as a science free of presup-
positions comes to be gradually developed in the course of Fragata’s complete phil-
osophical production. It is, however, already announced, in its essential lines, in the 
work of 1959, namely, in the way in which he attempts to show an insurmountable 
dif ﬁ culty in Husserl’s doctrine of intentionality. 
 In fact, the relation between “predicate-noemata” and the determinable X, or 
“object pure and simple,” is the  vexata quaestio of the interpretation of paragraphs 
129–34 of the  Ideen . In Husserl’s exposition, the noeses are correlated to an objec-
tual content, or ideal unity of meaning, designated by the term “noema.” Intentionality 
is not, however, referred to noema as an object, but to the object by means of the 
noema in such a way that the end-point of the intentional relation is described as an 
“object X,” which is intended by means of one or many noemata. 
 Fragata highlights this peculiar transcendence in the midst of the noema, as if 
consciousness surpassed itself not only to what is immanent to it in an intentional 
way (the noema itself), but also to what is purely and simply transcendent: “This 
reference [to object X] can only be explained with a new type of ‘transcendence’ 
within consciousness and so, therefore, as the noema transcends noesis, so should 
the ‘object’ transcend the noema.” Fragata interprets this object X as a tertium quid 
between the noema, as intentional immanence, and the transcendent object of the 
natural attitude, in such a way that it would result from the ambiguous fusion of 
them. In fact, these texts from the  Ideen give Fragata the opportunity for an interpre-
tative decision which he expresses as follows: “As a consequence of this theoretical 
position [Husserl’s own], it is as if the intentional object wavers between the noema 
and the peculiar transcendence of the natural attitude.” 20 The object thus maintains, 
 19  Idem, pp. 189 and 187. 
 20  Idem, p. 144. 
306
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
on the one hand, “the immanent and therefore intrinsic character of the noema and, 
on the other hand, a type of immanent transcendence arises here, which gives it a 
character, if we may express it in this way, of a type of transcendental ‘in itself.’” 21 
 This supposed obscurity in Husserl’s doctrine leads Fragata to the  ﬁ rst formula-
tion of a far-reaching critique to transcendental phenomenology. For him, the 
ambiguous status of the object X in the Husserlian doctrine of intentionality in the 
Ideen means that objectivity cannot be entirely reduced to a subjective genesis (rela-
tive to the object only as intended). It also means that the natural attitude is not fully 
absorbed by the transcendental attitude, but rather that, on the contrary, the world of 
natural experience should be maintained as a sphere to which philosophy (and not 
only the empirical sciences) should inevitably return, thus abandoning the phenom-
enological reduction and the identi ﬁ cation of being and being-for consciousness. 
“We do not recognize the possibility of stopping in pure signi ﬁ cation, that is, in the 
object as merely signi ﬁ ed, as Husserl proposes. And this means to fall back, inevi-
tably, into the natural attitude.” 22 
 Based on these theses, Fragata attempts at last a complete overthrow of Husserl’s 
fundamental position. For Fragata, “the excess of radicalism manifests itself, in fact, as 
a lack of radicalism,” because “if Husserl wanted to develop his phenomenology as the 
true foundation of philosophy, he would have to deny the reality of the object as exterior 
and, in general, the world existing in itself.” Consequently, “a profound analysis of this 
problem would lead him to the conclusion that, after all, the true radical attitude consists 
in starting with the object as known, but not in considering it as merely known.” In this 
way, “the ideal of radical foundation was, as in Descartes, condemned to failure,” 
because the necessary departure from the transcendental attitude towards the sphere of 
the natural one “is not, by any means, equivalent to falling to a naïve or pre-scienti ﬁ c 
stance,” but is imposed “by virtue of the very same demand for radicalism.” 23  
 In short, for Fragata, if it is correct that the reduction from being to phenomenon 
is the appropriate strategy for clarifying the how of knowledge, on the other hand, it 
leaves completely in the dark the question of how the phenomenon in itself is even 
possible or, to use his expression, what is the ontological foundation of the “phe-
nomenality of the phenomenon.” This is the reason why the transcendental attitude 
leads back to the natural attitude. The demand for the conditions of phenomenality 
imposes a regressive question about the very possibility of givenness, and this is no 
less than a return to natural attitude. This is the very path which allows Fragata to 
return, beyond Husserl, to realism and to metaphysical speculation, both so impor-
tant for his Thomistic education. 
 Fernando Gil (1937–2006) was an original Portuguese philosopher. Until his 
death, he taught simultaneously at the New University of Lisbon, Portugal, and the 
École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Paris. He was not a phenomenologist 
by formation. His life-long intellectual interests were concentrated chie ﬂ y in problems 
 21  Ibidem . 
 22  Idem, p. 249. 
 23  Idem, pp. 259 and 261. 
307
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
pertaining to epistemology. Nonetheless, he received continuous inspiration from 
some authors of the phenomenological tradition, in particular Husserl. As he put it 
in  La Conviction , “the epistemological analysis continues itself through the phe-
nomenology of the act of knowing.” 24 Reading Husserl, he addressed many ques-
tions, like those concerning time-consciousness, the transcendental ego, passive 
genesis , and, most importantly of all, the phenomenological theory of evidence. 
 As a matter of fact, as an epistemologist, Gil was concerned by the problems of 
proof, on the one hand, and by the subjective experience of conviction, on the other. 
He wrote two books about it:  Preuves  and  La Conviction . 25  Nevertheless, both the 
objective procedures of proof-making and the subjective growth of conviction, point 
together to a kind of proto-experience where truth imposes itself without proof, as 
the compulsive, immediate and direct presence of the thing itself. This proto-experi-
ence is called  evidence . In his book about it,  Traité de l’evidence, Gil considers 
Husserl as “the unique thinker who has  deeply developed a doctrine about evidence.” 26 
Indeed, Husserl presents a genealogy of evidence in works such as  Erfahrung und 
Urteil,  and both a description and an epistemic quali ﬁ cation of evidence in works 
like the  Ideen  and  Cartesianische Meditationen . Since Gil intends to bring about 
what he calls an “archeology of evidence,” Husserl’s approach is, then, “the major 
reference” in his entire book, among so many other authors he discusses at length, 
such as Duns Scott, Ockham, Descartes, Arnauld, Malebranche, or Moritz Schlick. 
 Gil starts from the assumption that evidence is entrenched in the perception-
language system. Evidence is not the bare intuition of a thing, nor a simple linguistic 
representation of it. It is rather the settling of a tension going from thing- anticipation 
through meaning-representation to thing-giveness trough intuition; evidence is, 
then, the outcome of a complete satisfaction of an expectation. Husserl’s funda-
mental conceptual pair intention/ful ﬁ llment is, then, for Gil, a strong insight into 
the deepest structures of evidence. Husserl refused any affective character of evi-
dence, as Gil remembers, quoting a text from  Ideen  about a supposed “feeling of 
evidence.” Nonetheless, for Gil, Husserl’s correct refusal of a kind of “mystical” 
feeling as a mark of evidence is one-sided, after all, because, to begin with, the pair 
intention/ful ﬁ llment is a kind of “theoretical re ﬁ nement” of a deeper psychic struc-
ture based on the pair desire/satisfaction, and, despite his refusal, Husserl himself 
talks about a “contentment in knowledge,” or a “satisfaction in ful ﬁ llment,” or an 
“endeavor to the possession of the thing itself,” recognizing rightly that “there is a 
contentment proper to evidence.” 27 The other conceptual pair that Gil acknowl-
edges as fundamental for a theory of evidence is Husserl’s related concepts of 
“adequacy” and “apodicticity,” which Gil puts on the side of the sign in the pairs 
language/perception, intention/ful ﬁ llment (and eventually desire/satisfaction): 
“adequacy emphasizes the ful ﬁ lling presence of the  being intentioned, while 
 24  La Conviction (Flammarion: Paris, 2000), 182. 
 25  Preuves (Aubier: Paris, 1988);  La Conviction (Flammarion: Paris, 2000). 
 26  Traité de l’évidence (Jérôme Millon: Grenoble, 1993), 8. 
 27  Idem, pp. 10–11. 
308
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
 apodicticity is like another name for the evident  knowledge . Apodicticity—peak of 
the  Richtigkeit —points to the epistemological side of evidence, whereas adequacy 
points to its ontological root.” 28  
 Gil’s theory of evidence is developed in two stages. First, he proceeds to the 
deduction of the concepts of evidence. Second, he identi ﬁ es the operator of evi-
dence. Regarding the  ﬁ rst stage, he presents the concepts of attention (with its roots 
in orientation), ostention (rooting in contact), intuition (founded in vision), and 
injunction (arising from voice), as the cornerstones of evidence. The discussion 
with Husserl’s conceptions is very signi ﬁ cant concerning the phenomenological 
analysis of orientation, attention, contact, and most of all intuition (mainly in the 
 Ideen and  Erfahrung und Urteil ). Concerning the second stage, the after all not so 
surprising thesis of Gil is that  hallucination is the operator of evidence. The close 
relation between evidence and hallucination is to a certain extent concealed due to 
the dominance of the pathological approach to hallucination. Yet the concealment is 
not so complete, given that “evidence is wholly fashioned by a hallucinatory lan-
guage, … and the homology—unexpected and non-trivial—between the description 
of evidence and the description of hallucination.” 29 
 Gil identi ﬁ es a threefold operation. 30  First, what he calls the X-operation (Freud’s 
“primitive hallucination” of the baby hallucinating his mother’s breast), connecting 
desire and an aesthesical feeling of satisfaction; second, a H-operation, intellectual-
izing the aesthesical feeling in the experience of a compulsive presence, which meta-
phorically express itself as “awaking,” “capture,” “light,” and “voice,” and conceptually 
through the full Husserlian concepts of “attention,” “ostention,” and “intuition”; 
 ﬁ nally, an E-operation transforms presence into adequacy, and satisfaction into apod-
icticity. These two last operators (not considering the metaphorical dimensions) con-
stitute, for Gil, the core of Husserl’s phenomenological analysis. They are rooted, 
however, in the ef ﬁ cacy of an X-operation hallucinating aesthesis from desire, which 
is beyond the reach of Husserl’s phenomenological methods of description. 
 The object of evidence is something existent, and all existents are individual, 
says Gil in the  ﬁ nal chapter of his  Traité de l’évidence . Husserl’s dictum in  Erfahrung 
und Urteil— “experience is the evidence of individual objects”—is, then, for Gil, a 
truth that points back to unsuspected depths of our psychic life. They explain, we 
could say at last, following Gil’s analyses, why experience of a surrounding world 
of individual objects is, for us, something so interesting and so unavoidable. 
 João Paisana (1945–2001) was a professor at the Faculty of Letters of University 
of Lisbon, Portugal. His main work  Fenomenologia e Hermenêutica 31 studies the 
difference between Husserl’s and Heidegger’s phenomenologies. He characterizes 
the  ﬁ rst as re ﬂ exive and explicative, and the second as hermeneutical. According to 
Paisana, both authors would agree that only a meaning-structure could capture a 
being as such, disagreeing, however, about its nature. For Husserl, this structure has 
 28  Idem, p. 11. 
 29  Idem, p. 220. 
 30  Idem, pp. 218–252. 
 31  Fenomenologia e Hermenêutica (Lisboa, Editorial Presença, 1992). 
309
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
an apophantic character and is revealed through an analysis of the intentional content 
of the acts of consciousness, while, for Heidegger, this structure is revealed in an 
“encounter” which grounds the possibility of predication and the constitution of 
being as an object for a theoretical stance. The core of Paisana’s argument is to 
claim that, not only do the modalities of this “encounter,” established by Heidegger, 
arise from a development of the  als Struktur , as Husserl presented it in  Logische 
Untersuchungen , but also that the hermeneutical reinterpretation of the  als Struktur 
allows for the overcoming of some dif ﬁ culties in the explicative phenomenology. 
 Trying to describe the intentional content of a lived experience in  Logische 
Untersuchungen , Husserl draws a distinction between three senses in which such 
content can be understood: either as an intentional object, or as the act matter in 
opposition to its quality, or as an intentional essence. Within the  ﬁ rst sense, how-
ever, Husserl still makes a further distinction: between the object as such and that 
same object according to how— als was —it is intended. Husserl defends, therefore, 
that in any intentional act an object can only be intended insofar as it is determined 
in a certain way: for example, the Emperor of Germany  as the Emperor of Germany 
and not, for instance, as the grandson of Queen Victoria. The intentions are not, 
however, strictly nominal. A full intentional act has a syntactic structure, conveying 
categorical elements that are not given in sensible intuition. Thus the well-known 
question of “categorical intuition”: it seems that it pervades already the putative 
more simple and fundamental sphere of sensible intuition. 
 In his work, Paisana analyses Heidegger’s position regarding the theory of cate-
gorical intuition, which the latter considered the  Brennpunkt of  Logische 
Untersuchungen . If, as Husserl proposes, the perceived is in fact an object, the 
objectuality of the object is not itself perceived in sensible intuition, but depends of 
a previous understanding of the sense of being. According to Heidegger, this para-
dox was not suf ﬁ ciently taken into account by Husserl given that, when referring to 
the sensible object, Husserl never thinks of the  thing perceived as such, but always 
of it already determined as an object. Being, for Husserl, is being an object, as 
Heidegger will say, and this purported evidence will allow Husserl to defend that 
between categorical and sensible intuition there is a relation of grounding where-
upon the  ﬁ rst is grounded upon the latter. Husserl could not, therefore, notice the 
limits of his explicative phenomenology, that is, the impossibility of accounting for 
the modalities of the pre-objective “encounter” with being as such. For Heidegger, 
for the intuition of a being to be possible, as well as predication, a previous under-
standing of the sense of being is already presupposed. Heideggerian phenomenology 
will thus adopt the  ﬁ gure of a hermeneutics of factic existence where the under-
standing of being originally takes place. 
 Paisana argues that Husserl, after the  Logische Untersuchungen , and particularly 
after the  Ideen , only intended to determine the possibilities of explicative phenome-
nology, grounding it on the fact that consciousness, through re ﬂ ection, comes to an 
explicit experience of what it objecti ﬁ es. It is the  epochē , then, which will allow phe-
nomenology the exclusive concentration on the transcendental  ﬁ eld. In order for phe-
nomenology to be able to present itself as a universal science and not as a particular 
science of the psychic realm, it would be necessary that it could present consciousness 
as an autonomous reality from which all other kinds of reality are constituted. However, 
310
P.M.S. Alves and C.A. Morujão
the author interprets Husserl’s position after the publication of the  Ideen  as consisting 
also in a partial self-criticism in relation to the positions defended in this work, in 
particular, regarding the manner in which the intentional analysis was conducted. 
Husserl becomes aware that the world is more than a  ﬂ uid and changing  ﬁ eld of per-
ceived things, but also implies a horizon which surrounds the perceived and refers to 
a bundle of possibilities of penetrating it. In other words, Husserl recognizes the need 
to abandon the primacy of intentional objectifying acts. They presuppose a more fun-
damental kind of “intentionality” or, to speak Heidegger’s language, they are based in 
a previous encounter and in a previous comprehension of the sense of beingness. 
 Will this  ﬁ nal turn of Husserl’s thought allow for reconciliation between explicative 
phenomenology and hermeneutical phenomenology? That possibility will be denied 
by Paisana. 
 For Husserl, the pre-given world will not let itself be studied in the natural atti-
tude of everyday life. The access to it requires the practice of an  epochē , even if of 
a different kind than the one developed in  Ideen . This new  epochē— as an  epoch ē of 
the objective sciences—is required by the new orientation of intentional analysis 
that does not start from the objectifying consciousness, as it happened in the work 
from 1913. As Paisana recognizes, remembering Husserl’s own words in  Krisis , it 
has its starting point in the universal constitutive life in which the world appears as 
continuously pre-given. But this is, nonetheless, a new orientation still within expli-
cative phenomenology; it is not a severing from it and an approach to the theses of 
the hermeneutics of facticity. The point is that, as the author defends, now referring 
to  Erfahrung und Urteil , this pre-given world, albeit it is ante-predicative, is not 
pre-objective, it is a world of individual objects perceptively constituted that passes 
continuously to the theoretical stance through the spontaneity of judgment. Even 
departing from intentionality as an objectifying act and reaching the pre-given world 
of the  Lebenswelt, the question about the “objectuality of objects” (or about the 
sense of being in Heidegger’s idiom) remains a silent and dark point in Husserl’s 
explicative phenomenology. This is why, for Paisana, explicative phenomenology 
must be overturned by hermeneutic phenomenology. 
 At last, it is worth noting the work of Maria Manuela Saraiva about Husserl’s 
concept of imagination. Her research was about the several Husserlian concepts of 
imagination ( Phantasie, Bildvorstellung, Neutralitätsmodi ﬁ kation ) chie ﬂ y in 
 Logische Untersuchungen and  Ideen. The work was presented as a PhD thesis to the 
 Institut Supérieur de Philosophie de l’Université de Louvain in 1963 and published 
in 1970 in the Phaenomenologica collection. 32 
 Some Glimpses Beyond 
 The interest in Husserl’s  Ideen continues today. In Brazil, Creusa Capalbo, at the 
University of Rio de Janeiro, and Carlos Alberto Ribeiro de Moura, at the University 
of São Paulo, have a strong interest in Husserl’s works and have written several 
 32  L’imagination selon Husserl. Phaenomenologica 34 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970). 
311
18 Husserl’s  Ideen in the Portuguese Speaking Community 
essays about the phenomenology of the  Ideen.  In Portugal, Carlos Aurélio Morujão, 
at the Catholic University of Lisbon, and Pedro M. S. Alves, at the University of 
Lisbon, are as well fully committed to Husserl studies. A Portuguese phenomeno-
logical journal, named  Phainomenon, has been edited since 2002. 
 A  ﬁ rst Portuguese translation of  Ideen,  by Márcio Suzuki, was published in Brazil 
in 2006, with an introduction by Carlos Moura. A second Portuguese translation, by 
Alves and Fidalgo, will be published in 2013, in the centenary of the celebrated  Ideen 
zu einer reinen Phänomenologie and phänomenologischen Philosophie.  
313
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_19, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 But all of these things are questions of detail, which are of a 
subordinate kind and say nothing against the deep admiration, 
which the repeated reading of this wonderful book elicits in me. 
(Schutz to Kaufmann, August 27, 1930) 
 The In ﬂ uence of the  Ideen on Schutz 
 Though Schutz criticized Husserl’s treatment of intersubjectivity in the  Ideen (1913), 
he also recognized its achievements. Phenomenological reduction, developed in 
 Ideen I , yields many “profound insights relating to the foundation of the social sci-
ences,” 1 and Schutz employs it in  Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt (1932), 
but “only so far as this is necessary for acquiring a clear understanding of internal 
time-consciousness. ” 2 The reduction makes focal not objects but their meanings, and 
these objects appear as the unities of meanings that constitute reality (as opposed to 
the ontological structure of objects). Consequently, at precisely the point where 
Schutz in his later “On Multiple Realities” contrasts his  ﬁ nite provinces of  meaning 
with William James’ ( ontological ) sub-universes of reality, it is not surprising that 
 M.  Barber ,  Ph.D. (*)
 College of Arts and Sciences ,  St. Louis University ,  St. Louis ,  MO ,  USA 
e-mail:  barbermc@slu.edu 
 Chapter 19 
 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy 
 Michael  Barber  
 1  Alfred Schutz, “Edmund Husserl’s Ideas, Volume II,”  Collected Papers , vol. 3:  Studies in 
Phenomenological Philosophy , ed. I Schutz (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 39. 
 2  Alfred Schutz,  Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt: Eine Einleitung in die verstehende 
Soziologie , ed. M. Endress and J. Renn, vol. 2:  Alfred Schütz Werkausgabe , ed. R. Grathoff, H-G. 
Soeffner, and I. Srubar, redaction, M. Endress (Konstanz: UVK, 2004), 129, 129n.59, translated as 
 The Phenomenology of the Social World , trans. G. Walsh and F. Lehnert (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1967), 43, 43n.82. 
314
M. Barber
he cites  Ideen I , thereby showing its methodological in ﬂ uence on his later work. 3 
Parts III and IV of  Der sinnhafte Aufbau depends upon Husserl’s “Nachwort zu 
meinen ‘Ideen,’” (1931) which provides for a “constitutive phenomenology of the 
natural standpoint.” 4 Such a phenomenology, which avoids the transcendental reduc-
tion and the nest of problems with intersubjectivity that accompany its deployment, 
yields a phenomenological psychology consisting of an eidetic analysis of the inner 
experience of a society of living minds. 5 
 In the  Aufbau , Schutz regularly acknowledges his indebtedness to Husserl for 
his insightful accounts in  Ideen I on: the intentional animation of hyletic data in 
perceptual experience 6 ; the  ﬂ ow of consciousness, including retention, recollec-
tion, re ﬂ ective anticipation, and memory 7 ; the noetic and noematic sides of experi-
ence 8 ; and the recovery of the constituting processes that lie behind science’s fully 
formed propositions and that can be insightfully reactivated. 9 Schutz contrasts the 
different kinds of potentiality opened up when a thetic act is able to pass into 
doubt, probability, or questioning and when conscious processes themselves can be 
neutralized (e.g., in phenomenological re ﬂ ection), and he relates these kinds of 
potentiality to objective and subjectivity probability respectively. 10 In his later 
works, Schutz cites  Ideen I for the “consciousness of” nature of experience 11 ; the 
description of experience “exploding” objects (e.g., the tree in the distance turns 
out to be human) 12 ; the neutralizing of thetic consciousness through imagining 
(though neutralizing differs from phantasy) 13 ; and the fringes or horizons of the 
 3  Alfred Schutz, “On Multiple Realities,”  The Problem of Social Reality , vol. 1 of  Collected Papers , 
ed. M. Natanson (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1962), 230; German translation: “Über die man-
nigfaltigen Wirklichkeiten,”  Theorie der Lebenswelt 1: Die pragmatische Schichtung der Lebenswelt , 
ed. M. Endress and I. Srubar, vol. 5.1  Alfred Schütz Werkausgabe , 206; Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu 
einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie , 1:  Allgemeine Einführung in 
die reine Phänomenologie , ed. Karl Schumann,  Husserliana ,  Gesammelte Werke , III/1 (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), 1210–11 [henceforth  Hua III], translated as  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , First Book:  General Introduction to a 
Pure Phenomenology , trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1983), 128–29.  
 4  Edmund, Husserl, “Nachwort,”  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie , 3:  Die Phänomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissenschaften , ed. Marly Biemel, 
 Husserliana ,  Gesammelte Werke , vol. 5 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952),158, translated as 
“Epilogue,”  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , 2: 
 Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution , trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer, Collected 
Works, vol. 3 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), 426. 
 5  Husserl, “Nachwort,” 144/Epilogue, 426. 
 6  Schutz,  Der sinnhafte Aufbau , 119 / Phenomenology of the Social World , 35. 
 7  Ibid., 152–54/57–58, 162/64, 169/67, 219/97. 
 8  Ibid., 175–76/71. 
 9  Ibid., 189n.80/83n.82. 
 10  Ibid., 425–426/238. 
 11  Alfred Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , vol. 3:  Collected Papers , ed. I Schutz 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 5. 
 12  Schutz,  The Problem of Social Reality , 235. 
 13  Ibid. 
315
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
past and future experiences accompanying each actual experienced present. 14 Even 
when not explicit, Schutz borrows from  Ideen 1 , as, for instance, when he uses the 
same example, a table, which for Husserl maintains its identity across multiple 
intra-psychic perspectives, to explain how an object retains its identity across mul-
tiple interpersonal perspectives. 15  
 The  Ideen also underlies Schutz’s appreciation of the uniqueness of each indi-
vidual’s consciousness. He describes “the possibility of synthetic unity as the cen-
tral viewpoint in phenomenology” 16 ; and just as separate, polythetic acts are gathered 
into higher syntheses, yielding a monothetically given object, so the total 
con ﬁ guration of one’s experience, lived out step by step throughout one’s duration, 
makes one’s experience “mine.” 17 Therefore, no one’s consciousness could coincide 
with anyone else’s since one would have had to live through the other’s experiences 
in the order and intensity in which they were experienced, as Husserl himself 
observed. 18 By the way, the polythetic/monothetic distinction in  Ideen I plays a 
foundational role in Schutz’s theory of music, the meaning of which “is essentially 
of a polythetical structure.” 19 
 Another aspect of the  Ideen  that Schutz engages is “essential insight.” 20 Despite his 
criticism that  Wesensschau  often proved to be a stumbling block, he draws on Husserl’s 
treatment of essences in  Ideen I  when he considers the “pure form” of Thou-orientation¸ 
which is only an “ideal limit” since in real life we always meet real people with con-
crete personal characteristics, just as ideal essences (e.g., in mathematics) set an ideal 
limit that descriptive, morphological essences can only approach. 21 In explaining our 
familiarity with musical pieces on the basis of the socially derived, everyday types, 
Schutz explicitly refers to  Ideen I  and  III  when he discusses how one can obtain from 
such types via eidetic method an understanding of pure universals. 22  
 Finally, in “Symbol, Reality, and Society,” Schutz explains how the later Husserl 
concentrated on “pairing,” a form of passive synthesis, in which consciousness con-
stitutes two or more distinct phenomena as a unity. Though Schutz was not satis ﬁ ed 
with  Ideen II ’s use of instant, unre ﬂ ective “pairing” (and not self-conscious inference) 
to explain how the other’s material body appresents her conscious life, he admit-
ted that Husserl rightly saw in  Ideen 1 that all signitive relations are special cases of 
appresentation based on pairing (e.g., words appresenting meanings). 23 
 14  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 11. 
 15  Schutz,  Der sinnhafte Aufbau , 323/170–71; Husserl,  Hua III: 84/86–87. 
 16  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 10. 
 17  Schutz,  Der sinnhafte Aufbau , 179–80/75. 
 18  Ibid. 
 19  Alfred Schutz,  Studies in Social Theory , vol. 2:  Collected Papers , ed. A. Brodersen (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1964), 172; Hua 5: 274–77/284–87. 
 20  Schutz,  Der sinnhafte Aufbau , 887–92/8–11. 
 21  Ibid., 324–25/164; Alfred Schutz,  Collected Papers 4 , ed. H. Wagner, G. Psathas, and F. Kersten 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996), 194. 
 22  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 107;  Hua 5 :154–85/167–96. 
 23  Alfred Schutz, “Symbol, Reality, and Society,”  The Problem of Social Reality , 294–96, 314. 
316
M. Barber
 Despite this rather massive reliance on the volumes of Husserl’s  Ideen, Schutz 
takes issue with Husserl on intersubjectivity, particularly within  Ideen II , which he 
and Maurice Natanson had paraphrased but never published. 24 Schutz’s critical 
comments appear in “Edmund Husserl’s Ideas, Volume II” (1953) and “Das Problem 
der transzendentalen Intersubjektivität bei Husserl.” 25 
 First of all, Schutz contests Husserl’s identi ﬁ cation of the “optimal” or “true” 
appearance of an object in the solipsistic sphere with the “normal” appearance since 
the latter depends on the intersubjective acceptance of objective nature. Secondly, 
he raises questions about the relationship of the various I’s introduced by Husserl in 
 Ideen II (the I-man, the psychological I, the spiritual I, and the transcendental ego) 
and about how I-subjects relate to I-objects (the I and Me). Thirdly, he inquires 
about the relationship between the I-can motivations of the spiritual personalistic 
sphere and idea-psychical dependences (e.g., attractions to object) as causal depen-
dencies on environmental circumstances. 26 
 Fourthly, Schutz  ﬁ nds Husserl’s account of empathy inadequate, particularly the 
idea that the material thing appearing as another’s body “of the same type” as my 
own, triggers a transfer of sensations localized in my body to another human being. 
Schutz objects that perhaps other thinkable bodies (e.g., of animals) might appear as 
the same type as my own, that Husserl’s argument does not take suf ﬁ cient account of 
the difference between the body for me and the body for the other, that the localiza-
tion of sensations belongs to the sphere of vitality and is incapable of transferrence 
by empathy (presumably understood as more a matter of a spiritual level), and that 
speci ﬁ c localizations become problematic if the other is a female and I am a male. 27 
 Schutz declares,  ﬁ fthly, that Husserl’s analysis of sociality and social groups is 
“the least satisfactory part” of  Ideen II since he overlooks how communication pre-
supposes a social relationship based, one might presume, on the mutual “tuning-in” 
relationship between communicator and addressee of communication that Schutz 
explains in “Making Music Together.” 28 Finally, Schutz rejects Husserl’s idea of 
social personalities of a higher order (collectivities), and he suggests that the effort 
of Georg Simmel, Max Weber, and Max Scheler to reduce social collectivities to 
interactions between individuals is closer to the spirit of phenomenology. 29 
 24  Michael Barber,  TheParticipating Citizen: A Biography of Alfred Schutz (Albany: SUNY Press, 
2004), 175. 
 25  Alfred, Schutz, “Das Problem der transzendentalen Intersubjektivität bei Husserl” 5 (1957): 
81–107; translated as “The Problem of Transcendental Intersubjectivity in Husserl,”  Studies in 
Phenomenological Philosophy , 51–91; a recent translation with comments by Dorion Cairns 
appears in  Schutzian Research 2 (2010): 9–52. 
 26  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 36–37. 
 27  Ibid. 
 28  Ibid., 38; Alfred Schutz, “Making Music Together,”  Studies in Social Theory , 177. 
 29  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 38–39. 
317
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
 In “Das Problem der transzendentalen Intersubjektivität bei Husserl,” after 
presenting Husserl’s views on empathy in  Ideen 1 , particularly about how the other 
is never originarily given, and after presenting and criticizing the three stages of 
Husserl’s argument for the transcendental constitution of the other in the Fifth 
Cartesian Meditation (i.e., the second  epochē , the apperceptive transfer of the sense 
“lived body” to the other, and the appresentation of the full concretization of the 
other),  30 Schutz turns to the discussion of intersubjectivity in  Ideen II . He questions 
the possibility of the empathic transfer of localizations and insists that reciprocal 
understanding is presupposed by a community of knowledge and communication. 31 
Finally, he rejects again personal unities of a higher order, which involve an “exces-
sive metaphorical usage of inadequate terms” 32 that shows a “regrettable ignorance 
of the concrete sciences of society” 33 on Husserl’s part. 
 The Problem of Empathy 
 Introduction: Genetic Phenomenology 
 Husserl holds that an apperceptive transfer of the sense “animate organism” from 
myself to another takes place in empathy ( Einfühlung ), here meaning a practical rec-
ognizing of the other being as engaged with me as an interactive and conscious coun-
terpart, as opposed to the “sympathizing with another” signi ﬁ ed in common parlance. 
However, Schutz in his critique of Husserl’s  Ideen II  and  Cartesianische Meditationen 
asserts that the differences between myself and the other are so fundamental that the 
transfer of “animate organism” from myself to another becomes problematic. Schutz 
asks, for instance, how I could carry out the transfer of localization of sensations to the 
other if I am a man and the other a woman. 34  Furthermore, the difference deepens 
insofar as I experience my own consciousness originarily, from within, and I never 
have such an experience of the other. 35  I will argue that these criticisms fail because 
they overlook key issues regarding  Einfühlung : (1) the genetic character of the discus-
sion of empathy; (2) the basic and widespread tendency of mental life to identify and 
assimilate; (3) the level beneath thought at which empathy occurs; (4) the massive 
similarities present between animate organisms; (5) the pervasive practice of con-
sciousness to project itself beyond itself; and (6) the massiveness and constancy of the 
unique kind of validation involved in such sense transfers. 
 30  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 51–53, 57–69. 
 31  Ibid., 57–59. 
 32  Ibid., 73. 
 33  Ibid. 
 34  Schutz,  Studies in Phenomenological Philosophy , 38. 
 35  Ibid., 63. 
318
M. Barber
 The discussion of empathy is best understood,  ﬁ rst of all, as an example of 
“genetic phenomenology” attempting to return to the genesis of the experience, that 
is, to a “primal instituting” 36 in which “an object with a similar sense (animate 
organism) became constituted for the  ﬁ rst time.” 37 How is it, Husserl asks, that 
something grasped as an animate organism “must have derived this sense”? 38 What 
must have gone on in order for me to be able to recognize another as an animate 
organism? The meditating ego can penetrate into the intentional constituents of 
experience and discover intentional references leading back to a “history.” 39 
Although Husserl in the Fifth Meditation seems to conceive the transcendental con-
stitution of the other, of which the transfer of the sense “animate organism” to 
another is a stage, as an example of “static phenomenology,” many prominent com-
mentators suggest that he is methodologically confused and that this transfer is a 
matter of genetic phenomenology. 40 If one considers the transfer of sense as instanc-
ing static phenomenology, as a stage in the constitution of the Other undertaken by 
a deliberate, meditating phenomenologist within the constraints of phenomenologi-
cal reduction, then Schutz’s objection that however similar the other may be to me, 
the glaring difference, that I do not have originary access to the other’s conscious-
ness the way I do to my own, would block the sense-transfer. Furthermore, Husserl 
would have seemed to contradict himself in arguing both for the similarity between 
my body and the other’s (a similarity that warrants the sense-transfer “animate 
organism”) and yet af ﬁ rming that my body stands out since it is given to me origi-
narily, as the other’s never is. By contrast, if the transfer of sense has to do with 
genetic phenomenology, which returns to the moment when one  ﬁ rst recognizes 
another, one could be talking about how a child recognizes “scissors” and transfers 
that sense to other scissors-likenesses, automatically and immediately. In such 
cases, there may not be much concern over the evidence contradicting the transfer 
(e.g., the lack of originary experience of the other) or much noticing even that one 
is contradicting oneself. 
 36  Edmund Husserl,  Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge , ed. Dr. S. Strasser, 
 Husserliana, Gesammelte Werke 1 (henceforth  Hua 1) (Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950), 141; trans-
lated as  Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology , trans. Dorion Cairns (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1960), 111. 
 37  Ibid. 
 38  Ibid., 140/110. 
 39  Ibid., 113/79. 
 40  Julia Iribarne,  Husserls Theorie der Intersubjektivität (Freiburg/München: Verlag Karl Aber, 
1994), 29, 30, 42, 43, 44, 46–47, 52; Iso Kern, “Einleitung des Herausgegebers,” Zur 
 Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität, Texte aus dem Nachlass, Dritter Teil: 1905–1920 , ed. Iso 
Kern,  Husserliana , Gesammelte Werke , vol. 15 (henceforth  Hua 15) (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1973) xxi; Nam-In Lee, “Static-Phenomenological and Genetic-Phenomenological Concept of 
Primordiality in Husserl’s Fifth ‘Cartesian Meditation,’”  Husserl Studies 18 (2002): 165–83; 
Klaus Held, “Das Problem der Intersubjektivität und die Idee einer phänomenologischen 
Transzendentalphilosphie” in  Perspektiven transzendentalphänomenologischer Forschung , ed. 
U. Claesges and Klaus Held (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1972), 25. 
319
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
 This lack of concern corresponds to the fact that genetically conceived apperceptive 
transfers on the basis of analogy or similarity are passive associations taking place 
beneath the level of conscious control, as we shall see. 
 Similarities 
 In our everyday, extroverted relationship to objects, we are inevitable typi ﬁ ers. In 
experiencing anything for the  ﬁ rst time, the experience sets up an abiding, more or 
less strong expectation that anything like it will be experienced as it was. We 
“apperceive,” that is, bring to perception the set of meaning-predicates that we 
have acquired in our history and that we apperceptively transfer to whatever is like 
what we have experienced before assimilating the new to the already experienced. 41 
As Dorion Cairns remarked, “the fundamental tendencies of mental life are tenden-
cies to identify and to assimilate.” 42 Similar data congeal with other similar data 
forming lower level unities and building up gradually into higher level unities. 
Bodies covered with fur remind us of other bodies with fur, and gradually we build 
up the idea of a “dog” by conjoining furriness with other conglomerates of features 
(e.g., sharp teeth, barking, etc.) to form the higher idea of “dog,” a unity of already 
united features. 
 Likewise empathy needs to be understood as part of this being led to assimilate 
or associate similar with similar, a fundamental law of consciousness. For instance, 
in encountering something external that bears any similarity to ourselves, it imme-
diately reminds us of that in us to which it is similar. Hence to see a hand shaped 
like my hand, I am immediately reminded of my own hand. And of course, the 
experience my hand has of its own inner feeling, that is, what it feels like from 
within that hand, I immediately associate with the other’s hand opposite to me. 
That is, I assume that this other’s hand which is shaped like mine and externally 
resembles it, also has its inner experience the way I do. There is a transfer back and 
forth, the similarity of the other’s hand to mine reminds me of my own hand, and 
my hand’s internal experience is associated with the hand of the other that is exter-
nal and similar to my own. So when Schutz objects that accounts of empathy 
emphasize similarities and pass over differences, he overlooks this fundamental 
tendency of consciousness to notice similarities, whether in the perception of 
objects or empathy.  
 41  Edmund Husserl,  Die Lebenswelt: Auslegungen der vorgegebenen Welt und ihrer Konstitution, 
Texte aus dem Nachlass (1916–1937) , ed. Rochus Sowa,  Husserliana, Gesammelte Werke , vol. 39 
(henceforth  Hua 39) (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008), 443, 517. 
 42  Dorion Cairns. “Some Applications of Husserl’s Theory of Sense-Transfer,” ed. L. Embree, F. 
Kersten, R. M. Zaner,  The New Yearboook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy 
7 (2007): [309–35] 315. 
320
M. Barber
 An Objection and “Beneath the Controlling I” 
 Of course one might object with Schutz that when I transfer the inner experience of 
my hand to the other’s hand externally comparable to my own, I still overstep what 
is rationally legitimate since I lack any inner experience of the other’s hand. In rais-
ing this question, Schutz thinks like a philosopher, much as one would expect of 
someone engaging in the transcendental constitution of another under phenomeno-
logical reduction. However, such assimilative syntheses, or apperceptive transfers, 
take place through passive associations that happen on a lower level of conscious 
activity, 43 beneath the threshold of the control of the I and certainly of higher level 
philosophical deduction. These transfers are “motivated,” not physically caused, on 
the basis of the relationship of similarity between what we have experienced (in the 
past, e.g., my hand) and what we are now encountering (another’s hand). Hence the 
other’s hand “reminds” me, instantly, of my hand, and the internal experience of it 
is immediately imputed to the other’s hand, similar to mine. Again as Cairns 
observed, these kinds of assimilative syntheses happen on a level of believing that 
is more fundamental than thinking. 44 It is no wonder then that Husserl himself 
repeatedly insists that the apperceptive transfer of inner conscious experience to the 
other on the basis of an analogy (or similarity) between my body and the other’s, is 
not a matter of any deductive conclusion of analogy. 45 
 In apperceptive transfers, however, the basis is similarity, not identity. Hence, the 
objects passively associated with each other could be similar in some respects and 
different in others. The linkage between my hand and the other’s would hold even 
though the other’s hand were brown-skinned and mine white-skinned. Differences, 
though, do not preclude the transfer. Here the automatic, passive nature of the assimi-
lative syntheses, taking place beneath the level of the controlling I, on the basis of 
similarities that do not preclude differences being present, seems not to be taken 
account of suf ﬁ ciently by Schutz who re ﬂ ectively points out differences, even basic 
differences, that he thinks should prohibit the transfer of sense “animate organism.”  
 Multiple Similarities 
 Another factor that Schutz seems to overlook is the extensive similarities present 
between animate organisms. Beyond the similarity existing between my hand and 
another human being’s hand, various species possess other features that passively 
 43  Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität, Texte aus dem Nachlass, Erster 
Teil: 1905–1920 , ed. Iso Kern,  Husserliana ,  Husserliana , Gesammelte Werke, vol. XIII (hence-
forth  Hua 13) (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973), 431. 
 44  Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität, Texte aus dem Nachlass,Zweiter 
Teil: 1905–1920 , ed. Iso Kern,  Husserliana ,  Husserliana , vol. XIV (henceforth  Hua 14) (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973), 498; Cairns, “Some Applications of Husserl’s Theory of Sense-
Transfer,” 312–14, 323, 335. 
 45  Hua 15: 14;  Hua 13: 431. 
321
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
evoke the transfer, such as the hands or feet of primates, similar to my own; organs 
used for grasping things, as crabs’ claws; and the sensitivity of skin and correlative 
reaction-movements, as when a worm withdraws from being pricked or an animal’s 
forehead wrinkles when it is pained. The assorted behaviors of another lived body 
can elicit the transfer insofar as I am reminded of my lived body by the other’s: valu-
ing; striving; acting; grasping according to right or left, before or after; shoving; 
bumping up against; touching; carrying; doing; suffering; being pained by bright 
sunlight; acting; reacting; retreating before an object of fear; being attracted to food; 
eating; producing the agitated movements and shrieking voice indicative of anger; 
achieving ends; seeing; and judging or speaking out (the latter two being particu-
larly human). 46 
 However, it is not merely the having of organs similar to mine or the sharing of 
many similar features, though, that evokes the transfer of “animate organism” to the 
other. Once can imagine a decapitated head with its eyes frozen open, and one might 
not make the transfer—in fact such an experience can be extremely uncomfortable 
insofar as one notices eyes, ears, and a mouth like one’s own, but no motion at all. 
The head does not exhibit animation, and this strangeness or even eeriness upsets 
the usually immediate transfer of the sense “animate organism” to which I would be 
inclined on the basis of physical features similar to my own. What is further neces-
sary is that body resembling mine in its eyes, ears, mouth, or mien also appear as 
single, uni ﬁ ed, whole organism in which another subject governs or holds sway 
( walten ). As examples of animals holding sway in their animate organism, one 
might think of the dog playing with the newspaper in coordination with my extend-
ing the paper toward it or the  ﬁ sh softly waving its  ﬁ ns and a tail in such a way as to 
maintain a stable position in the water so that it might be able to look at me. 
 Before scienti ﬁ c re ﬂ ection might set in to criticize the ideas that dogs play games 
or  ﬁ sh purposively stabilize themselves to look at us, in everyday life we transfer the 
sense “animate organism” on the basis of a wide variety of analogical organs and 
behaviors, feet, hands, heads, eyes, wrinkled brows, retreating from invasive touch-
ing, governing in an organism, governing in correlation with one’s own governing 
in one’s organism, and so on. Perhaps Husserl emphasized that the transfer of this 
sense takes place across a wide variety of beings, from humans to dogs to gorillas 
to  ﬁ sh to worms to accentuate how the smallest similarities evoke the transfer despite 
much larger differences than those that Schutz points out. Hence, the differences 
between myself and a worm or between myself and a  ﬁ sh are much more profound 
than the differences between a male or female human being or even between some-
one who has originary experience of his or her consciousness and someone to whose 
consciousness he or she does not have originary access. It is as if Husserl is suggest-
ing that the multiple and varied possible similarities that evoke the transfer far out-
weigh even major differences. 
 The very functioning of empathy across species on the least analogical basis sup-
ports Cairns’s claim that the tendency to identify and assimilate is a fundamental 
tendency of mental life and the wide extent of empathy reinforces the view that 
 46  Hua 14: 240. 
322
M. Barber
these transfers occur through passive association beneath the level of rationality and 
beyond the “I’s” control. It is telling in this regard that Schutz faults Husserl for 
seeming to attribute consciousness to non-human beings; it is as though Schutz does 
not recognize the pervasiveness and uncontrolledness of pre-rational assimilative 
processes. Furthermore, the widespread anthropomorphism that characterizes even 
the most critical of humans who in non-scienti ﬁ c everyday life readily attribute 
purposes or feelings to animals (e.g., the dog is saddened or the mouse wants the 
cheese on the trap) may be residua from the prior, more fundamental strata that 
involves the empathic transfer of the sense “animate organism.” Indeed, Cairns 
points to residua of pervasive animistic transfers even to inanimate objects in the 
fact that we do such things as think of violent weather as indicative of nature’s anger 
even though our scienti ﬁ cally sophisticated culture might discredit such anthropo-
morphism as irrational. Such anthropomorphism further suggests that transfers have 
always already taken place since the adult critical examination of such anthropo-
morphism always comes later with respect to strata of experience that have already 
left their mark upon us, that point to past assimilations that we may not even recall, 
and that require genetic rather than static phenomenology for their recovery. 
 Pervasively Transposing the Self 
 The tendency on the preconceptual level to impute inner experience, for example, to 
the other’s hand similar to mine has the effect of doubling myself, as if there were 
another I, like mine, “over there,” whose experience is similar to my own, and one 
moves on to suppose that “other I” experiences things similarly to the way I would 
if I were there. 47 These anticipated similarities, which take place beneath the control 
of the rational I, all have the character of a self-transposition, a placing of myself or 
experience like mine into another spatial position that I could potentially occupy 
and that is other than the one I currently occupy. Because consciousness continually 
engages in the varied forms of self-transposition to be discussed below and does so 
in extensive and intricate ways, I will argue here that empathy, the transference of the 
sense “animate organism” to another, is but one variant of such self-transposition, 
analogously bound to the others. By association with these assorted forms of 
 self-transposition, empathy acquires their unre ﬂ ective, automatic, and habitual 
 character. It is as if empathy, the transference of the sense “animate organism” to 
another, belongs to a range of interconnected patterns of self-transposition that are 
so readily and constantly enacted that the Schutzian objection, namely that I do not 
experience the other originarily as I do myself, strikes one as strange if it is meant 
to imply that one should hesitate to enact empathic transference. 
 The beginning of this tendency to self-transpose can be traced to one of the fun-
damental features of consciousness observed by Husserl, namely its inclination to 
 47  Hua 13: 263;  Hua 14: 489, 499, 500, 514. 
323
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
“intend-beyond-itself,” an inclination implicit in any consciousness and an essential 
moment of it. 48 Hence, in perceiving an object, one is aware that that the object is 
surrounded by horizons, possibilities to be explored or uncovered, potentialities 
which conscious life could realize, different points of view that one might take up 
on the object at hand, were one to venture into such horizons. In envisioning such 
possibilities, one would think of one’s body as if it were over there and that “there” 
would become a new “here” analogous to the spatial position one now occupies, and 
one anticipates having in that new “here” a conscious experience of the object at 
hand analogous to the experience one has from the here one now occupies. 49 
 Although imagining my body as over there and looking upon it as if it were 
(completely) external to myself is impossible since my I has its center, or  Nullpunkt , 
of orientation within my body, nevertheless, I could consistently see the body of the 
other over there, external to me, and, conversely, the other could consistently see my 
body as appearing completely exterior to itself. However, I can transpose a con-
sciousness  like mine over there in that body of the other  like mine, and that trans-
posed consciousness can be taken to be looking at my body as external to itself—and 
I can do this all consistently as long as this other I is not identical with mine, but 
only  similar to it. If one transfers the sense “animate organism” to another by reason 
of his or likeness to me, the potential positions one might take upon an object at 
hand as one penetrates the horizon of an object at hand can be easily assimilated to 
the bodily position  another might assume in relation to the same object at hand. In 
so doing it is as if the other’s viewpoint would be another version of one’s own on 
the object at hand, as if one’s own potential point of view on object at hand would 
also be a version of the other’s, and as if the other were another self like one’s own 
self, only in a different position. 50 
 As I watch another deal with an object similarly as I do, as the dog, for instance, 
with the newspaper when we play together, our similar reactions indicate that we 
are dealing with the same thing. When an animal walks to the left to avoid bumping 
into a table, as I would, this fact leads me to believe that it is the same table to which 
both of us are relating. Just as the thing retains an identity across the various per-
spectives I take upon it, through time, so the identical thing retains its identity across 
the different perspectives that I and the other conscious animal are taking upon it. 
The newspaper which is experienced by me is also being experienced by the dog: 
we are experiencing the same object. The sense of a common world, then, depends 
upon the recognition of another who is conscious like me and seeing what I am see-
ing, and, conversely, the continued common experience of the same object rein-
forces the belief that the other consciousness “there” is like mine. The massively 
common experience of our world, then, con ﬁ rms the empathic transfer of “animate 
organism” to the other. 51 
 48  Hua 1: 84/46. 
 49  Hua 13: 277. 
 50  Hua 15: 571. 
 51  Hua 14: 241, 376. 
324
M. Barber
 Although we transpose ourselves or experience like ours into another at a spatial 
distance from ourselves, such self-transposition can happen across temporal bound-
aries also. If we think that we have access to our predecessors, who do not share our 
time, through the documents or artifacts they leave behind, do not these higher level 
activities (leaving documents or artifacts) build upon and presuppose that I have 
transferred the sense “animate” organism to this predecessor on some level or would 
have if he or she were present? Is not such a transference of sense dependent upon 
transfers of such sense that take place in the present and are then transferred into the 
past? Similarly, if we seek to explain the mass migration of animals in the past by 
looking for some cataclysmic event or loss of food sources, are we not presupposing 
our experience of the way animals in the present  ﬂ ee dangers or hunt for food? To 
attribute such  ﬂ eeing or hunting to another in the present depends upon a prior trans-
ference of the sense “animate organism” to such animals, and, as it we have seen 
above, it could be that behaviors like  ﬂ eeing danger or hunting for food as we do 
might underlie the sense-transference itself. Even though history may illuminate 
our erroneous suppositions about how others, including animals, are like us, the 
writing of history itself presupposes and extends the fundamental experience of 
empathy in the present. 
 This tendency to transpose oneself into the other that lies at the root of empathy 
involves, as we have seen on the philosophical plane, an overstepping of what phi-
losophers might claim is rationally legitimate since we lack any access to the other’s 
inner experience. Despite the fact that this tendency to transpose oneself is to be 
found in the “intending-beyond” basic to all intentionality (accompanied by hori-
zons), to apperceptive transfers (e.g., of the sense “animate organism” to another) 
on the basis of similarity, and to the multiple perspectives that can be adopted on the 
perceived objects in our common world—it is part of a constant tendency to realize 
potentialities by going beyond what is given in the now—the philosophical critics 
have a point: the other is never originarily given to me. The other is never  present to 
me, but only  re-presented . Empathy always involves realizing possibilities beyond 
what is given originally to me. But, in fact, we transpose ourselves repeatedly within 
our own consciousness in “re-presentations” beyond presentations—empathy can 
be seen as analogous to all such processes. 
 The  ﬁ rst example of re-presentations ( Ve-rgegenwärtigungen ) that move beyond 
presentations appears in perception in which the non-accessible sides of an object 
are appresented, or represented, beyond the core of what is perceived; the edge of 
the house announces the side of the house I do not see. The announced, but not yet 
accessed, side of the house is available to me without being present in the way the 
side of the house that I face is. In a like way, we can say that through the other’s 
body which is similar to mine, the other’s consciousness is available to me, not 
directly, not originarily, but rather as re-presented or appresented. However, this 
type of re-presentation of the other’s conscious processes on the basis of his or her 
body’s similarity with my own, which evokes the transfer animate organism to the 
other, differs in one signi ﬁ cant way (difference is not identity) from the representation 
of the appresented sides of a material object present to me from one side: I can 
325
19 Alfred Schutz and the Problem of Empathy
always walk around the house and the re-presented side of the house will be presented 
to me. However, in empathy, my representations of the other’s consciousness 
processes will never be able to be converted in to presentations. 52 
 Similarly, in memory, an act which the present I engages in, I have in mind an 
earlier, past I, which is now not present, but re-presented, and this I’s conscious 
processes with their intentional objects are represented, but not originarily present 
to me anymore. It is as if I transposed ( versetzt ) 53 my present self into the past, into 
a past self which is a modi ﬁ cation of my present self. 54 It is as if I were there, with 
an “as-if” character also found in phantasy, but I am not actually there 55 —a kind of 
doubling of the I takes place in much the way that the I in empathy doubles itself by 
projecting an(other) I in the body confronting me. In each case we have a present act 
(of empathy or memory) that represents what is not actually present, the other’s 
conscious processes or a bygone self with its bygone conscious processes. Here 
again, though, a fundamental difference appears insofar as re ﬂ ection discloses that 
the I that I remember is the same I as the I that is remembering, but the I re-presented 
in empathy is another’s, not my own. 56 
 In  ﬁ ction, too, I represent another I, a modi ﬁ cation of myself, as endowed with 
conscious processes and their correlative intentional objects in a way similar to 
empathic representation, and in neither case is another originarily present to me. 
However, empathy differs fundamentally from phantasy in that empathy involves 
the other’s living body ( Leib ) being actually present whereas  ﬁ ction involves no 
actual community with the other. Empathy does involve an “as-if” feature, as does 
memory, but in it one deals with an actual being whose body is perceptually given, 
providing the basis for apperceptive transfers. 57 
 What emerges from these examples is that  Einfühlung resembles but differs from 
perception, memory, and phantasy. Like all of them it involves an element of 
 re-presenting what is not originarily given, but empathy is also a unique manner of 
re-presenting, differing from all others. 58 All these acts taken together reveal a fun-
damental tendency of consciousness to re-present beyond what is presented, to 
recover what is absent, even though it might not even be able to be fully recovered, 
to reach out beyond what is given, to realize new possibilities beyond the given, 
creatively not to allow itself to be limited by what is perceptually, originarily there—
and this tendency is active beneath higher level thought processes. By thinking that 
the lack of originary experience impedes empathic transference, Schutz overlooks 
 52  Hua 15: 354. 
 53  Hua 13: 3128–29;  Hua 14: 317. 
 54  Hua 13: 52, 85–86, 318. 
 55  Hua 15: 516. 
 56  Hua 15: 358, 516, 586. 
 57  Hua 13: 318;  Hua 15: 359, 418, 642. 
 58  Hua 13: 374;  Hua 15: 354. 
326
M. Barber
the force that self-transposing empathy acquires by its pre-re ﬂ ective association 
with the pervasive self-transposing dynamism of consciousness to move beyond 
itself by at least re-presenting what is not or cannot be presented. 
 Validation and Conclusion 
 The kind of veri ﬁ cation ordinarily used in phenomenology, the intuitive having of a 
state-of-affairs, whether through empirical or categorical intuition, is not available 
for empathy since we lack originary experience of the other. Husserl, though, argues 
that appresentation of the other’s consciousness has its “own style of veri ﬁ cation.” 59 
Every experience points to further experiences that ful ﬁ ll and verify one’s transfer 
of the sense “animate organism,” that is, if the animate organism of another contin-
ues to prove itself as an animate organism throughout the course of experience. 60 
Indeed, if it is similarity that prompts the transfer of the sense “animate organism” 
to another, if that organism continues to behave in a way that one would expect of 
such an organism, in other words, if the organism continues to behave similarly to 
the way other organisms behave, the transferred sense continues to be validated. 
Sometimes the very behaviors that evoke the transfer, e.g., grasping objects, claw-
ing, wrinkling a brow, withdrawing from invasive touch, are also the ones, one could 
imagine, that would continue to validate the transfer. It is the coherence of the 
entirety of experience—a coherence which we anticipate by  any transference on the 
base of similarity since we expect reality will unfold coherently with what it was—
that validates sense-transfers. Again the massiveness of our experience that similars 
behave similarly perhaps explains why “the fundamental tendencies of mental life 
are tendencies to identify and to assimilate.” 61 This massive experience also explains 
why Schutz’s objection that the recognition of a major difference (e.g., the lack of 
originary experience of another) between organisms that are otherwise extensively 
similar would impede the sense-transfer of “animate organism” to another is offered 
on an intellectual plane, far distant from the undertow of conscious dynamics at 
work long before one begins to theorize. 
 In brief, Schutz’s argument against the sense-transfer of “animate organism” to 
another ignores the genetic nature of the discussion on empathy, the basic and wide-
spread tendency of mental life to identify and assimilate, the level beneath thought 
and the controlling I where the sense-transfer occurs, the massive similarities 
between animate organisms, the widespread dynamism of consciousness to trans-
pose itself and project beyond the originarily given, and the massiveness and con-
stancy of the unique manner in which we validate such sense-transfers. 
 59  Hua 1: 143/113. 
 60  Ibid., 144/114. 
 61  Cairns, “Some Applications of Husserl’s Theory of Sense-Transfer,” 315. 
327
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_20, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The In ﬂ uence of the  Ideen on Sartre 
 According to Simone de Beauvoir, Sartre’s “introduction” to Husserl and 
 phenomenology appropriately took place in a café:
 Raymond Aron was spending a year at the French Institute in Berlin and studying Husserl 
simultaneously while preparing a historical thesis. When he came to Paris he spoke of 
Husserl to Sartre. We spent an evening together at Bec de Gaz in the Rue Montparnasse. We 
ordered the specialty of the house, apricot cocktails; Aron said, pointing to his glass: “You 
see, my dear fellow, if you are a phenomenologist, you can talk about this cocktail and make 
philosophy out of it! Sartre turned pale with emotion … here was just the thing he had been 
longing to achieve for years—to describe objects just as he saw and touched them, and 
extract philosophy from the process. 1 
 As is well known, Sartre follows Aron’s lead and spends a year at the Institut 
Français in Berlin (and brie ﬂ y at the University of Freiburg) from 1933 to 1934. 2 
Even though Sartre claims (very late in his life) to have read only “ Ideen , and noth-
ing but  Ideen ,” we might infer from his few references to Husserl’s other works that 
he may have read more extensively. 3 Sartre, however, provides only rather cursory 
 Chapter 20 
 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological 
Ontology 
 Matthew  C.  Eshleman    
 M. C.  Eshleman ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, 
University of North Carolina Wilmington ,  Wilmington ,  NC ,  USA 
e-mail:  eshlemanm@uncw.edu 
 1  La Force de l’age (Paris Gallimard 1989, 157); English translation,  The Prime of Life , trans. 
P. Green (New York: Lancer Books, 1966), 162. 
 2  Sartre may have discussed Husserl (and Hegel) with Ferdinand Gerassi (a student of Husserl’s) as 
early as 1929, the year Husserl lectured at the Sorbonne, which lectures Sartre did not attend; see 
John Gerassi’s  Sartre: Hated Conscience of the Century , vol. 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1987), 113. 
 3  Sartre makes this claim in a  ﬁ lmed interview  Sartre par lui-même (shot mostly in 1972 but not 
released to the public until 1976) conducted by friends and later transcribed and published. See 
English translation,  Sartre by Himself , trans. R. Seaver (New York: Urizen, 1978), 29. 
328
M.C. Eshleman
remarks when citing these other works, and one could plausibly argue that they are 
derived from secondary materials. 4 It remains clear, nonetheless, putting disagree-
ments over how much Husserl Sartre read aside, that  Ideen zu einer reinen 
Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie not only had the greatest 
impact on Sartre’s philosophy, but also that Sartre saw it as a landmark moment in 
the history of philosophy. 5 The  Ideen was, according to Sartre, “‘the great event of 
pre-World-War-I philosophy’ which ‘was destined to revolutionize psychology no 
less than philosophy.’” 6 
 Five years after studying Husserl in Germany – while serving in the French 
military – Sartre re ﬂ ects in his  Les carnets de la drole de guerre that “to exhaust 
a philosophy is to re ﬂ ect within its perspectives, and create my own private ideas 
at its expense, until I plunge into a blind alley. It took me four years to exhaust 
Husserl.” 7 While considerable debate can be raised over the weight of “at its 
expense,” it seems safe to say that Sartre accepted the “methodological thrust” 
but not the “doctrinal detail” of Husserl. 8  To be sure, Sartre’s relationship to 
Husserl’s method changes over the course his early period, here somewhat arbi-
trarily de ﬁ ned as running from 1933 to 1943, after which Husserl’s in ﬂ uence 
trails off. 
 4  In  La Transcendance de l’égo (Library Philosophique: J Vrin, 1992 [1936]), hereafter cited TE, 
Sartre adopts Husserl’s early non-egological account of consciousness from  Logische 
Untersuchungen (TE 20) and employs  Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie des inneren 
Zeitbewusstseins (TE 22) to account for the temporal unity and continuity of personal identity 
without positing a transcendental ego, contra Husserl’s position in  Ideen zu einer reinen 
Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie . Sartre also mentions  Formale und tran-
szendentale Logik , and  Méditations cartésiennes in both  La Transcendance de l’égo (85) and 
 L’Etre et le Néant: Essai d’ontologie phénoménologique (Paris: Gallimard, 1971), hereafter cited 
EN, 288. Whenever there has been a question of any problems with the French text, I have checked 
it with reference to the “Édition Corrigé” (1976). 
 With that said, all of Sartre references to these texts are rather cursory, and they could plausibly 
have been derived from secondary sources, e.g., Eugen Fink’s essay “Die Phänomenologie Edmund 
Husserls in der gegenwärtigen Kritik.” Sartre refers to this essay twice in TE 36, 83. Fink’s essay 
was  ﬁ rst published in  Kant-Studien , Band XXXVIII, Heft 3–4, 319–84, and it was reprinted in 
Eugen Fink’s  Studien zur Phänomenologie 1930–1939 , Phaenomenologica 21 (Den Haag: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 79–156. 
 5  Allgemeine Einfuhrung in die reine Phänomenologie ,  Husserliana ,  Gesammelte Werke , III/1, ed. 
Karl Schumann, (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), translated as  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , First Book:  General Introduction to a 
Pure Phenomenology , trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1983), henceforth cited as I followed 
by § number. 
 6  See the concluding Chapter IX of  L’Imagination (Paris: Librairie Felix Alcan, 1936);  Imagination: 
A Psychological Critique , trans. F. Williams (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), 
127, hereafter cited IP. 
 7  Les carnets de la drôle de guerre (Paris: Gallimard, 1984);  War Diaries: Notebooks from a Phony 
War , trans. Q. Hoare (London: Verso, 1999), 183–84. 
 8  See Lester Embree, “The Natural-Scienti ﬁ c Constitutive Phenomenological Psychology of 
Humans in the Earliest Sartre,”  Research in Phenomenology 11 (1981): 41–60. 
329
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
 During the earliest part of the early period, 1933–1939, Sartre stands in closer 
methodological proximity to Husserl than during the composition and publication 
of  L’Etre et le néant (1943). 9 Whereas Sartre arguably employs the existence brack-
eting portion of the phenomenological reduction in “La Transcendance de l’égo” 
(1936) and  L’Imaginaire: Psychologie Phénoménologique de l’Imagination 
 (published in 1940 but worked on during the mid to late 1930s), Sartre abandons 
this component in  L’Etre et le Néant , though he accepts a modi ﬁ ed version  vis-à-vis 
what he calls  ré ﬂ exion puri ﬁ ante. 10 
 Sartre’s  ﬁ rst “essay” on Husserl, “Une idée fondamentale de la phénoménologie 
de Husserl: l’intentionnalité,” was (likely) written in 1933,  ﬁ rst published in 1939, 
and reprinted in 1947. 11 Brief and poetic, this essay develops several central themes 
that reoccur throughout Sartre’s early period and covered in greater detail in 
Chap. IX of  L’Imagination . In the latter, Sartre clari ﬁ es Husserl’s method (the tran-
scendental and eidetic reductions) and what Sartre thinks are the most important 
lessons to be learned from Husserl. These lessons, with a few additions, may be 
summarized in  ﬁ ve points, and they provide a good outline of Husserl’s impact on 
Sartre’s early philosophical thought. 
 First, in Chap. IX of  L’Imagination (1936), Sartre accepts the primacy of pheno-
menology over all of the empirical sciences, and, consequently, that phenomenology 
can ground a radical, non-empirical kind of psychology. Relevant here is also 
Sartre’s Introduction to  Esquisse d’une théorie des emotions (1939) . 12 While Sartre 
 9  Hereafter, all references will be to both  L’Etre et le néant: Essai d’ontologie phénoménologique (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1971 [1943]), cited EN followed by page reference, and  Being and Nothingness: An Essay on 
Phenomenological Ontology , trans. H. Barnes (New York: Philosophical Library, 1958), cited as BN.  
 10  Sartre’s relationship to the phenomenological reduction(s) is something of a debate. Herbert 
Spiegelberg,  The Phenomenological Movement , vol. 2 (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1960), 478, claims, 
“the phenomenological reduction is not very prominent in  L’Etre et le Néant.” Joseph Catalano, 
 Commentary on Jean-Paul Sartre’s Being and Nothingness (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1974), 8, claims Sartre does not employ the reduction at all. Thomas Busch offers a much more 
nuanced set of considerations in “Sartre’s Use of the Reduction:  Being and Nothingness 
Reconsidered,”  Jean-Paul Sartre: Contemporary Approaches to His Philosophy , (Pittsburgh: 
Duquesne UP, 1980), 17–30, when he persuasively argues that Sartre rejects the transcendental 
reduction but employs a variation of it tied up in an unelaborated concept of purifying re ﬂ ection. 
Eric James Morelli’s “Pure Re ﬂ ection and Intentional Process,”  Sartre Studies International 14/1 
(2008): 61–77, offers a variation on Busch and argues that purifying re ﬂ ection plays a central role 
in establishing Sartre’s ontology, but he maintains that purifying re ﬂ ection should not be under-
stood at all in terms of the transcendental reduction but rather in terms of Husserl’s notion of 
transcendental re ﬂ ection. The details of this debate cannot be entered into here but the  ﬂ atfooted 
claim that Sartre entirely abandoned the reduction is, at best, misleading. 
 11  First published in  La Nouvelle Revue Française 304 (January, 1939): 129–31, and reprinted in 
 Situations I (Paris: Gallimard, 1947), 30–33, hereafter IFP. 
 12  L’imagination  (Paris: Librairie Felix Alcan, 1936);  Imagination: A Psychological Critique , trans. F. 
Williams (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), hereafter cited IP. Sartre maintains the 
priority of phenomenology over empirical psychology and natural science in several ways. First, 
before experimentation, one must know “as exactly as possible what one is going to experiment upon” 
(IP 129). Second, without argument, Sartre follows Husserl’s thesis that only purely formal science 
can coherently ground material science (ibid). Third, later in EN, Sartre holds that only a  ﬁ rst person 
methodology can give an adequate (non-falsifying) account of consciousness’s grasp of the world.  
330
M.C. Eshleman
accepts that the achievement of this new phenomenological psychology requires 
suspending the natural attitude, Sartre interprets the natural attitude in a normative 
way that Husserl would have rejected. Whereas Husserl claims that the natural atti-
tude is internally coherent (I §55), Sartre roughly equates the “natural attitude” with 
consciousness’ effort to escape from itself by reifying itself into a psyche (TE 83; 
EN 212–18). Since this  ﬂ ight requires thinking about oneself in a temporally durable, 
thing-like fashion, it involves an internal contradiction. In this way, Sartre aligns the 
“natural attitude” with bad faith. 13 
 Second, a proper account of intentionality reveals, on the one hand, that it is an 
activity and not a substance, and, on the other, that consciousness enjoys unmedi-
ated contact with its intentional objects, while these objects exist, in some sense, 
independently of this contact. 14 This unmediated relation entails Sartre’s rejection of 
all forms of indirect realism and representational views of cognition. And, he accepts 
(plausibly contra Husserl) what will (in our longer critical essay) be labeled “anom-
alous direct realism”—anomalous since Sartre’s view requires that consciousness 
plays an active role in cognition in a way that would be rejected by traditional 
empiricist views. Care, however, must be taken here. In holding some version of 
realism, Sartre claims to reject Husserl’s transcendental idealism, where this rejec-
tion amounts to Sartre’s limiting the active role consciousness plays to mere synthesis 
and negation. Whether Sartre misunderstood Husserl on this point shall also be 
addressed below. For the moment, suf ﬁ ce it to say, consciousness does not add 
anything in the activity of cognition to our knowledge of objects, contra Kant. 
Rather, it only takes away, via negation. 
 Third, the denial of representational models of cognition entails rejecting what 
Sartre labels “the illusion of immanence,” i.e., the suppositions that ideas, images, 
or representations are, in any way, contained within or are internal to consciousness 
(FIP 30–33, IP 15). Sartre, however, initially accepts Husserl’s notion of  hylē , with 
some quali ﬁ cations, in  L’Imaginaire , which could be taken as a form of imma-
nentism. Sartre later sees  hylē as an unnecessary theoretical posit that overloads 
consciousness by implanting it with quasi-matter (EN 26; BN lix). In expunging 
hyletic (sense) data from consciousness, Sartre achieves what perhaps may be the 
most parsimonious account of consciousness to date. 
 Fourth, Sartre takes inspiration from Husserl’s few scant remarks on imagination 
(I §23, §111) and freedom (I §49), and Sartre comes to see these two ideas as 
fundamentally related. In his most important book on imagination,  L’Imaginaire: 
Psychologie Phénoménologique de l’Imagination (written in the mid to late 1930s 
 13  Otherwise put, Husserl claims that only the theoretical natural attitude, which mistakenly 
interprets the material world as absolute, leads to countersense (I §55). In contrast, for Sartre, both 
the natural attitude and the theoretical attitude conceal an underlying incoherence. However, and 
this is crucial, the underlying theoretical incoherence is motivated by a deeper existential matter, 
namely to escape anxiety; whereas, for Husserl, it is just a theoretical confusion. 
 14  See especially, “Une idée fondamentale de la phénoménologie de Husserl: l’intentionnalité ” (op. cit.). 
331
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
and published in 1940), Sartre delivers a positive and wholly phenomenological 
account. 15 Crucially, in the conclusion to  L’Imaginaire , which Sartre arguably wrote 
later than the main body of the text, Sartre offers two transcendental arguments that 
conclude,  ﬁ rst, that imagination is essential to human consciousness and, second, 
that one necessary condition for the possibility of imagination is freedom from 
material causation. 
 While the details of this argument cannot be given here, Sartre arrives at this 
conclusion by characterizing imagination as a negation of factual reality. Since 
imaging consciousness posits nothing real, Sartre argues that reality cannot cause 
imagination. Sartre extends this position in  L’Etre et le néant and argues that 
negative facts like “Pierre is not here” do not, strictly speaking, exist in the world 
and cannot therefore cause consciousness to produce them. Sartre, as will be 
seen below, comes to see the negating feature of imagination as the essential 
feature of consciousness as such. Consciousness exists as a negation of itself and the 
world. Sartre characterizes consciousness’s negation of itself in idiosyncratically 
ontological terms, as a being internally distended by nothingness. This charac-
terization puzzles many commentators and clari ﬁ cation of this puzzle motivates, 
what follows.  
 What Is a Phenomenological Ontology? Introduction 
 The rest of this essay addresses the following question: “According to Sartre, what 
is a phenomenological ontology?” Now this may be a deceptively simple question, 
since, after all, the subtitle of  L’Etre et le néant, “ Essai d’ontologie phénoméno-
logique,” suggests the easy answer is that Sartre develops some kind of descriptive 
ontology. However, anyone who reads  L’Etre et le néant must suffer through very 
long stretches of abstract desert, punctuated only occasionally by oases of descrip-
tion, where much of that desert acreage simply does not look descriptive, at least not 
in any ordinary sense of the word. Thus, one may reasonably puzzle over just what 
kinds of ontological claims Sartre makes and in what relation they stand to his 
phenomenology. 
 Otherwise put, one may wonder whether Sartre’s ontology is purely descrip-
tive and if it is not, then in what sense it goes beyond description. To the extent 
that Sartre’s ontology goes beyond pure description, it may be said to differ from 
Husserl’s ontology (as characterized primarily in  Ideen I ). Since this essay argues 
that Sartre’s ontology goes beyond pure description, albeit with important 
quali ﬁ cations, a comparison with Husserl proves fruitful, though, perhaps, with 
some surprising conclusions. While Husserl can be interpreted as employing 
 15  Paris: Gallimard, 1940;  The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination , 
trans. J. Webber (London: Routledge, 2004). 
332
M.C. Eshleman
a purely descriptive method that suspends all claims constitutive of ontology 
(understood in the robust and not merely formal sense), this essays argues that 
we do better to understand Husserl as paving the road to a revolution in ontology. 
This revolution results from Husserl’s efforts to revise or collapse (depending 
upon your view) what can reasonably be called “ the cardinal philosophical dis-
tinction” between being (reality) and appearance, and without falling into either 
metaphysical idealism or metaphysical realism. 
 This interpretation complicates Sartre’s proximity to Husserl and raises a 
number of thorny questions, only one of which can be addressed here: if one suc-
cessfully collapses the being/appearance distinction, with the above caveat, what 
links phenomenology to ontology? Does this collapse entail that one can straight-
forwardly read ontology off of phenomenological descriptions via free variation and 
eidetic intuition or does it merely prepare the way to a new approach to ontology? 
This essay argues that Husserl and Sartre approach the linkage question in crucially 
different ways. Whereas Husserl can be plausibly read to characterize linkage 
straightforwardly in terms of intuition, Sartre views Husserl in a preparatory light 
that allows him to employ transcendental arguments to link phenomenological 
descriptions directly to ontological conclusions. If correct, a great deal of secondary 
literature misunderstands the  ﬁ ber of Sartre’s ontology, in both its strengths and 
weaknesses. 
 Preliminary Remarks 
 While different people mean different things by “ontology,” those who study 
ontology generally  ﬁ nd it fruitful to address one or more of the following  ﬁ ve  kinds 
of questions. (Q1) What exists? (Q2) What is the most general nature (or meaning) 
of that which exists qua its existing? (Q3) What do existents depend on, if anything, 
in order to exist? (Q4) What are the most general, and, hence, exhaustive categories 
and regions (Genus, Species, Differentia etc.) under which everything that exists (or 
possibly exists) falls? And (Q5) what are the (logical) relationships between parts of 
existents (or possible existents) understood as wholes and between existents taken 
as wholes to other wholes? Putting matters this way potentially expands and de ﬂ ates 
what Ancient philosophers accepted as ontology proper. 
 Husserl may be said to have expanded ontology with the ‘invention’ of purely 
 formal ontology in  Logische Untersuchungen, with re ﬁ nements in (Part One of ) Ideen 
I  and  Formale und  transzendentale Logik . 16  So understood, Husserl addresses a version 
of questions 4 and 5 and studies the categories and regions under which all possible 
“meanings” and “objects” fall, including the logical relations and forms of judgment 
 16  For the claim that “the concept of formal ontology was  ﬁ rst developed by Husserl,” see Robert Poli, 
“Husserl’s Conception of Formal Ontology,”  History and Philosophy of Logic 14/1 (1993): 1–14.  
333
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
applicable to all possible “meanings” and “objects,” without any commitment to 
whether any such “objects” actually exist and/or what they actually are. 17  Then, during 
Husserl’s transcendental idealist stage, he may seem to permanently de ﬂ ate ontology 
via a purely descriptive method that describes consciousness’s essential structures and 
its active role in constituting universal objects ( eidē ). On this reading, Husserl suspends 
questions 1 and 2, and goes beyond pure formality merely to address question 3. 
 While epistemological concerns (construed broadly as a “critique of reason”) 
motivate both stages, considerable debate centers on whether Husserl avoids all 
robust ontological and/or metaphysical claims during his transcendental stage. 18 
If robustness requires going beyond formal claims and saying something about 
what the “nature” or ‘essence’ of the furniture of reality  actually is (and not just how 
it  appears ), then, at  ﬁ rst glance, Husserl’s phenomenological method seems to forbid 
all robust ontological claims. After all, Husserl not only puts judgments of existence 
out of play but he also limits analysis to re ﬂ ection upon how phenomena are given 
to consciousness and not how things really are. 
 For reasons like this, commentators frequently locate Sartre’s (and Heidegger’s) 
departure from Husserl on the question of robustness, since Sartre clearly develops 
some kind of robust ontology, even if it turns out to be dif ﬁ cult to say precisely in 
what way. Consequently Sartre either revises and/or abandons some parts of Husserl’s 
method, or so the standard story goes. However, matters are more complex than they 
might initially appear. Husserl argues that bracketing does not mean  disregarding 
claims about reality but rather changing our attitude towards them. “Figuratively 
speaking, that which is parenthesized is not erased from the phenomenological 
blackboard but only parenthesized, and thereby provided with an index. As having 
the latter it is, however, part of the major theme of inquiry” (I, §76). 
 17  In “Phenomenology and Metaphysics,” Metaphysics, Facticity, Interpretation: Phenomenology 
in the Nordic Countries (Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003), ed. D. Zahavi, 
S. Heinämaa & H. Ruin, 5–6, Dan Zahavi argues that one can  appraise Husserl’s metaphysical 
neutrality in  Logische Untersuchungen over the way in which things really are in three ways. (1) 
This neutrality liberates us from a series of pseudo-metaphysical problems. (2) It prepares the way 
to address (appropriately posed) metaphysical questions. (3) It operates as an unnecessary and 
undesirable straightjacket. It should be noted that (1) and (2) are not mutually exclusive and that 
while Zahavi calls these “appraisals,” Husserl is more explicit in his preference for (1) and (2) than 
Zahavi indicates. Though these details cannot be worked out here, see Lee Nam-In’s essay 
“Husserl’s View of Metaphysics: The Role of Genuine Metaphysics in Phenomenological 
Philosophy,”  Phenomenology 2005, Vol. 1: Selected Essays from Asia , ed. Cheung Chan-Fai & Yu 
Chung-Chi, (Bucharest: Zeta Books, 2007). 
 18  Those who argue Husserl makes robust ontological and/or metaphysical claims frequently claim 
that Husserl does so  malgré lui. See for example, Stephen Priest who claims, “Husserl deploys an 
ontological, even fundamental ontological, vocabulary and may be read as a metaphysician  malgré 
lui, ” in “Husserl’s Concept of Being: from Phenomenology to Metaphysics,”  Royal Institute of 
Philosophy Supplement , 44, ed. A. O’Hear (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1999), 209. See also M. 
M. van de Pitte, “Husserl: The Idealist  Malgré Lui ,”  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
37/1 (Sep., 1976): 70–78. Many of the claims attributed to Husserl “in spite of himself’ frequently 
turn on textual ambiguities, and, perhaps, a failure to fully appreciate Husserl’s efforts to revolu-
tionize philosophy”. 
334
M.C. Eshleman
 Additionally, Husserl arguably makes at least a few robust ontological claims, in 
which case robustness alone fails to distinguish Husserl’s ontology from Sartre’s. 19 
Thus, the following discussion not only addresses possible areas of robustness in 
Husserl’s ontology in  Ideen I , but it also develops several additional criteria (Linkage, 
Dependency, and Priority) with which to more accurately distinguish their respec-
tive views. These criteria can be summarized as follows: (a) robustness refers to the 
degree to which ontology goes beyond pure formality; (b) linkage refers to how one 
establishes robust ontological claims; (c) dependency refers to whether and in what 
sense the world depends upon consciousness or vice-versa; and, (d) priority refers 
to that which comes methodologically  ﬁ rst, epistemology or ontology. We shall now 
examine these criteria. 
 Robustness 
 While Husserl claims (in  Ideen III ) that “all ontologies become subject to reduction” 
(§13), he frequently makes claims in  Ideen I that sound ontologically committed 
and in ways that go beyond pure formality. Husserl occasionally distinguishes 
between the “absolute being” of consciousness and/or  eidos and the “relative being” 
of matters of fact. Problematically, Husserl says “absolute” in many ways and this 
fact alone generates much of the disagreement over whether Husserl establishes 
genuinely robust ontological claims. 20 For the purposes here, Husserl’s uses of 
“absolute” fall into one of three categories: those with (a) purely epistemic mean-
ings, those with (b) epistemic meanings that plausibly denote robust ontological 
meanings and those with (c) purely robust ontological meanings, a few of which are 
implausible. 
 19  Steven Galt Crowell’s essay “Ontology and Transcendental Phenomenology Between Husserl 
and Heidegger,”  Husserl in Contemporary Context , ed. Burt Hopkins (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997), 
13–36, hereafter cited OTP, weighs in on the proximity question between Husserl and Heidegger. 
It clari ﬁ es complexities frequently ignored in terms of Heidegger’s proximity to Husserl, and it 
helped me to see that the same holds true with regards to Sartre. Crowell carefully argues that 
Husserl holds a more robust ontology than traditionally supposed, and, consequently, there is 
greater continuity between Husserl and Heidegger. This gist of Crowell’s case is that Heidegger’s 
critique of Husserl’s  Ideen I does not primarily turn on a rejection of the transcendental reduction. 
Rather, Heidegger’s critique concerns Husserl’s prioritization of theoretical epistemology over 
ontology. Unsurprisingly, Sartre (it will be seen) follows the  spirit of this critical line, though not 
its letter. While Heidegger’s ontology remains beyond the scope of this essay, Crowell’s discussion 
of Husserl’s ontology will be drawn upon below. 
 20  For a good survey of this debate’s contours, see Dan Zahavi, “The ‘absolute’ in Husserl’s tran-
scendental project: A question of method, metaphysics or manifestation?,”  Edmund Husserl 150 
Years: Philosophy, Phenomenology, Sciences , ed. C. Ierna, H. Jacobs, and F. Mattens (Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2010), 281–302. 
335
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
 Most frequently Husserl uses “absolute” in various clearly epistemic senses 
(see, e.g., I §10, §33, §41, §59, §67, §76). 21 The most central and relevant purely 
epistemic use distinguishes between how “physical things” and consciousness 
are given in fundamentally different ways and with fundamentally different kinds 
of evidence. Husserl sometimes characterizes this as a distinction between that 
which is  perceived (“physical things”) and  perception of them (grasped re ﬂ ectively), 
where Husserl takes  perception to be an inherent moment (or dependent part) of 
consciousness itself (I, §41). Since “physical things” are given only in adumbrations, 
they are always given as extending beyond any one particular facet. In contrast, the 
perspectives themselves (qua inherent moments of consciousness) are not given in 
(spatial) perspectives ( ibid. ). Husserl characterizes consciousness’ grasp of (this 
moment of) itself as absolute, insofar as it captures everything about this moment 
“all at once.” 
 Husserl correlates these modes of givenness with a distinction between kinds of 
evidence. Since perceptions of “physical things” are given incompletely, they are 
given inadequately. As Husserl puts it, “no perception of the physical thing is 
de ﬁ nitively closed; there is always room for new perceptions, for determining more 
precisely the indeterminatenesses, for ful ﬁ lling the unful ﬁ lled” (I, §149). Hence, 
claims about them are corrigible. In contrast to the incomplete way in which corrigible 
objects are given, consciousness grasps the inherent moments of itself completely. 
Consequently, consciousness cannot be mistaken about its inherent moments, insofar 
as its claims are constrained to the inherent moments themselves. 
 Less frequently, Husserl extends this epistemic sense of “absolute” to denote 
what are plausibly robust ontological meanings. We see this when Husserl con-
cludes, “thus there emerges a fundamentally essential difference between  being as 
mental process and  being as a physical thing ” (I, §42,  emphasis added ). Husserl 
claims of the being of physical things that “a being of that kind can only be given in 
perception through an adumbration” ( ibid .) and he goes so far as to argue that even 
God must necessarily perceive such spatial objects in an adumbrated way (I, §43, 
§150). Steven Crowell interprets Husserl to mean that “modes of being are de ﬁ ned 
in terms of different modes of givenness” (OTP, 21). 22 When understood in this way, 
Husserl plausibly arrives at ontological claims through epistemological claims 
about evidence, grounded in phenomenological descriptions. 
 Crowell, however, raises a puzzle, namely that “it is extremely dif ﬁ cult to decide 
whether the epistemological status of things is a result of their ontological status 
(determined independently of all epistemological considerations) or whether 
 21  Here are a couple of other epistemic uses. First, “absolute” refers to the exactness of formal 
science like pure mathematics (I, §10). Second, after performing the phenomenological reduction, 
we have (cognitive) access to essences, such that essences have “absolute” (epistemic/cognitive) 
independence from all spatio-temporal matters of fact (I, §33). In this way, essences are relative to 
consciousness, which Husserl’s characterizes as an absolute point of reference (I, §76). 
 22  OTP, 36. 
336
M.C. Eshleman
ontological status is determined by a certain kind of commitment rightly called 
epistemological” (OTP, 21). Crowell weighs passages that point in both directions 
and argues for the latter, namely that Husserl prioritizes epistemological concerns 
and in a way that constrain ontological claims to what we can rationally say. The 
limits reason imposes come to this. Since Husserl cannot intuitively conceive that 
“physical things” are given in any way other than adumbrated, any claims that go 
beyond this extend beyond the limits of reason. 
 Linkage 
 Supposing this were true, one may nonetheless reasonably wonder whether Husserl’s 
epistemological grounding of ontological (sounding) claims really achieves full 
robustness. This requires answering a more basic question: “What warrants linkage 
from phenomenology to ontology?” Problematically, the linkage question presup-
poses an answer to how robust one takes Husserl’s ontology to be, and so a few more 
details need to be worked out. 
 Husserl says (in the quote above) that physical things are necessarily grasped “in 
perception through adumbrations.” So does Husserl grasp the way in which physical 
things really are or merely how they appear? Otherwise put, are physical things 
 (in themselves) adumbrated, whatever exactly that may mean, or is it rather the case 
that they necessarily cannot appear but through adumbrations (or in an adumbrated 
way)? This question turns out to be dif ﬁ cult to answer. Husserl warns his reader that 
while his descriptions “may sound like statements about  actuality ” they “have 
undergone a  radical modi ﬁ cation of sense” (I, §89). One can read this warning in 
two ways. First, even though Husserl employs “being” talk, e.g., in §42, he has not 
ventured outside of phenomenology per se into the realm of ontology proper. 
Otherwise put, Husserl does not establish the essence of  being qua being  but rather 
more judiciously establishes the essence of “the  perceived as perceived ” (I, §88). 
Call this the de ﬂ ationary reading. 
 While the de ﬂ ationary reading  ﬁ nds no motivation to answer the linkage ques-
tion, a stronger second option remains. On the robust reading, in some novel sense, 
Husserl, via eidetic intuition and free variation, collapses the distinction between 
“being qua being” and “perceived qua perceived.” The essence of physical thing  qua 
perceived just is its essence  qua being , namely being qua given in adumbrations. We 
“know” this insofar as we cannot coherently imagine its falseness, e.g., by imagin-
ing that God grasps physical things in some supra-adumbrative way. So understood, 
the linkage question—what warrants the link from phenomenology to ontology—
dissolves. The essence of the phenomenon of physical thing qua perceived just is its 
essence qua being. To ask any further questions must necessarily go beyond intu-
ition, and, hence, they cannot reasonably be entertained (I, §24). 
 Now were the robust reading both correct as an interpretation and true, then 
Husserl seems to have defused a skeptical atomic bomb. The traditional skeptic 
argues that since the same thing appears differently to different people and since 
337
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
there is no uncontroversial way to decide amongst which of the different perceptions 
are veridical, we cannot know how things really are. We can only “know” how they 
appear to us. 23  However, on the robust reading, Husserl effectively shows that the 
skeptic cannot reasonably assert that the nature of physical thing  qua being differs 
from its nature  qua appearing , once this relation is properly construed. No rational 
being, including a God, could apprehend physical things in any other way. 
 While the skeptic may rejoin that Husserl overestimates the power of his ability 
to imagine counter-factual worlds, another avenue for skepticism goes like this. 
While Husserl consistently holds both (1) that the adumbrated (physical thing)  can 
exist independently of any adumbration and (2) that one cannot rationally entertain 
that it could be  given in any way other than qua adumbrated. However, neither claim 
entails that in order for there to be adumbrations there must be something adum-
brated. In other words, Husserl nowhere establishes that physical things actually 
exist and have the quality he ascribes qua factual existence. Rather, he only estab-
lishes that  if physical things actually exist, they must necessarily appear (to any 
consciousness whatsoever) in adumbrations. So understood, Husserl merely shows 
 how physical things must necessarily be/appear but not  that they actually exist. 24 
 Otherwise put, it remains unclear whether Husserl escapes from a version of 
what Kant called the “problematic idealism of Descartes” (B274), in never satisfac-
torily answering the skeptic who denies the existence of the factual world. 25 
 Thus,  even if we grant that Husserl successfully collapses how things are  qua 
appearance with how things are  qua being , he still has not shown  that things factu-
ally exist. It will be this small space for the skeptic to reinsert her wedge that Sartre 
may be said to attempt to close. He does so in answering the linkage question by 
employing transcendental inferences, as opposed to merely reading essences off of 
eidetic intuition and free variation. 
 Dependence 
 For the moment, another kind of worry may arise in consequence of collapsing 
the  being qua being / appearing qua appearing distinction. It may look like reality 
falls entirely to the side of appearances. In other words, when considering how 
Husserl answers the dependency question (Q3), it can look as if he ends up in 
 23  See, e.g., Sextus Empiricus,  Outlines of Skepticism , trans. Julia Annas and Jonathan Barnes 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000). 
 24  I read Husserl’s notion that the actual world lacks self-suf ﬁ ciency “in virtue of its essence” (I, §50) 
to establish only this point and nothing more. 
 25  As is well known, Kant claims that it is “a scandal of philosophy and universal human reason that 
the existence of things outside us (from which we after all get the whole matter for our cognitions, 
even for our inner sense) should have to be assumed merely  on faith , and that if it occurs to anyone 
to doubt it, we should be unable to answer him with a satisfactory proof” (KrV/CPR Bxxxix note).  
338
M.C. Eshleman
metaphysical idealism (a metaphysical thesis about the dependence of being on 
consciousness), as opposed to transcendental idealism (an epistemological thesis 
about the dependency of knowledge on consciousness). 
 We see this when Herman Philipse interprets Husserl as follows:
 Whereas naturalism holds that consciousness is a subordinate reality which depends for its 
existence on certain physical structures, transcendental idealism contends that the entire 
natural world, including human minds, is  nothing but an intentional structure of transcen-
dental consciousness. According to transcendental idealism, the world  ontologically 
depends on transcendental consciousness, which itself exists in  absolute independence 
(TI, 244,  emphasis added , see also 250). 26 
 Call this the robustly “ontological independence-dependence thesis,” namely the 
view that consciousness  can or would exist were the material world to vanish but 
that “the entire natural world is  nothing but an intentional structure” and, hence, that 
it  cannot exist without consciousness’ intending it. 27 If correct, it would be appro-
priate to label Husserl a metaphysical idealist. 
 26  See his essay “Transcendental Idealism,”  Cambridge Companion to Husserl , ed. B. Smith and 
D. W. Smith (Cambridge UP, 1995), 239–322, hereafter cited TI followed by page reference. There 
is some ambiguity in Philipse’s discussion, see also fn. 12 below. Philipse admits Husserl recog-
nizes that, in a factual psychological sense, consciousness depends on the world (TI, 250). For 
example, drinking alcohol changes our experience. Philipse, however, also claims that “the exis-
tence of the material world depends on consciousness” (TI, 256). A great deal rides on how we 
read “material world” and in what sense the dependence holds. Arguably the factual dependence 
of psychological consciousness on the actually existing material world (I, §76) entails that only the 
bracketed [world] depends upon on transcendental consciousness? If so, this dependence is not 
best described in ontological terms. Rather, the dependence should be construed broadly as episte-
mological. To be fair, Philipse correctly opposes the claim that “transcendental idealism is  merely 
an epistemological doctrine, and not an ontological doctrine” (TI, 245 emphasis added). However, 
the question concerns just how, where and what kinds of ontological claims Husserl establishes—
see below. The “independence-dependence” thesis is too strong. Even if we grant that Husserl 
maintains that consciousness has absolute ontological independence from the world, i.e., could 
exist without the world, and I think that we should not accept this, see fn. 28 below, this does not 
entail that the world (or the being of the world, if one prefers), could not exist without conscious-
ness. This latter claim obviously goes too far. 
 27  Philipse heavily weights Husserl’s annihilation of the world thought experiment in establishing 
the independence thesis. In I, §49 Husserl argues that we  can “imagine” consciousness existing 
after having annihilated the world, where annihilation can be read in various ways, e.g., complete 
vaporization of material being or just a chaotic disordering. Philipse, at times, seems to interpret 
Husserl as arguing from the conceptual possibility (that consciousness could exist without a world) 
to the conclusion that consciousness  would actually exist were the material world actually annihi-
lated. This would be truly amazing and amplifying of our knowledge, were it true. (For ampli ﬁ cation, 
see below). Philipse equivocates between the claim that consciousness “may” or ‘might’ exist 
without the world (TI, 256–58) and the claim that consciousness has  ontological independence 
(TI, 244, 250). In  An Introduction to Husserlian Phenomenology (Evanston: Northwestern UP, 
1993), Rudolf Bernet et. al, 68 suggest that Husserl’s annihilation of the world thought experiment 
(I, §49) was “probably expounded … in a particularly misleading manner.” Probably? The conclu-
sion to the thought experiment revolves around a (modal) ambiguity of the meaning of “can,” 
though clarifying this ambiguity takes some work. 
339
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
 On the face of it, the robust ontological independence-dependence reading goes 
too far. Husserl seems to maintain that the actual world (qua its being) has  ontic 
independence of any factually existing consciousness and that every factual con-
sciousness exhibits ontic dependence upon the factual world (I, §76). The reduction, 
once more, does not prevent intransigent judgments about factual being, it only puts 
them out of play (I, §90). So, even if we only judge ontic relations “naively” from a 
non-phenomenological viewpoint, i.e., in a non-skeptic defeating kind of way, we 
can hardly escape making them. This warrants our understanding the essential 
dependence of the bracketed [world] on transcendental consciousness in primarily 
epistemological terms of constitution. The world (qua constitution of meanings 
and  eidos ) “depends” upon “transcendental consciousness” but the actual world 
(qua factual being) does not depend upon any actual consciousness (I, §55). (Husserl 
stands closer to Kant than Berkeley. 28 ) 
 Enter Sartre 
 Commentators sometimes suppose that Sartre also criticizes Husserl for holding the 
ontological independence-dependence thesis. Clarifying why Sartre  might make 
this criticism helps clarify an especially abstruse feature of his ontology. Sartre 
On the basis of imagined annihilation, Husserl says, “consequently no real being … is  necessary 
to the being of consciousness itself” (emphasis added) and when he employs the Latin phrase, 
“ nulla ‘re’ indiget ad existendum ” (roughly, [consciousness] needs no extra-mental [thing] to 
exist), Husserl puts scare marks around the “re” [thing]. But if the unnecessary being is bracketed 
being, then it seems that what we can infer only pertains to bracketed [consciousness], i.e., tran-
scendentally reduced consciousness. This strongly suggests that only the  eidos of consciousness 
remains after annihilation but not any factual or actually existing consciousness. This motivates 
what one might call the softer, methodological reading of the annihilation thought experiment. 
From the essential possibility of annihilation we can conceptualize consciousness in transcenden-
tal terms, and, Husserl thinks that doing so helps to not simply grasp the non-material essence of 
consciousness but also that it shows how phenomenology opens up a “new”  ﬁ eld inaccessible to 
empirical psychology. In §54, Husserl may be thought to tip his hand when he restates the annihila-
tion argument conditionally. What follows from the imaginative annihilation of the world is a 
merely an imaginative view of what a post apocalyptic consciousness would look like. Namely, our 
imagined surviving consciousness would, in imaginative terms, be entirely un-empirical, e.g., it 
would have no body or gender. It would not even be human. In this way, we can read the thought-
experiment as an aid to clarify more precisely what the phenomenological reduction achieves, 
namely a transcendental grasp of consciousness qua consciousness puri ﬁ ed of all factuality. If cor-
rect, we should not read it as an argument for the ontological independence of actual consciousness 
from the world, pace Philipse. So understood, the modal ambiguity of “can” turns on the fact that 
what we see after the annihilation is not factual consciousness (can exist factually) but its  eidos 
(can exist ideally). 
 28  For a more sophisticated and detailed account of Husserl’s realist commitments, which entails 
rejecting the ontological independence-dependence thesis, see Karl Ameriks’ “Husserl’s Realism,” 
 The Philosophical Review 86/4 (Oct., 1977): 498–519. 
340
M.C. Eshleman
wrote in his diary that Husserl’s “philosophy evolved towards idealism, which 
I could not accept” (WD, 185). And, Hazel Barnes claims that “[Sartre’s] philosophy 
is not idealism, not even Husserl’s brand of idealism, as he points out, because 
Being in no way creates consciousness or is in any way dependent on consciousness 
for its existence” (BN, xx). While Barnes claims that Sartre interprets Husserl as 
holding that being  as such depends upon consciousness, Sartre never actually says 
this and his worry is likely more nuanced. 
 Two separate but related worries characterize Sartre’s worry. First, Husserl treats 
consciousness’ relationship to the world as an abstraction (EN 37–38; BN 3–4), which, 
at the end of the long philosophical day, does not escape the so-called “problematic 
idealism of Descartes.” Second, Husserl overloads consciousness with too much work 
when he claims that the being of the noema is being perceived (EN 16; BN 1). Painted 
in broad brush strokes, these two concerns boil down to this. In prioritizing epistemol-
ogy over ontology and simultaneously bracketing all factual being, Husserl not only 
fails to give an adequate  ontological account of the actual connection between con-
sciousness and the world, but he also fails to escape subjectivity and deliver objective 
knowledge anchored in the factual world. 
 Sartre initially states the central thrust of his worry like this: “Why not push the 
idea to its limit and say that the being of the appearance is its appearing? This is 
simply a way of choosing new words to clothe the old ‘Esse est percipi’ of Berkeley. 
And it is in fact just what Husserl and his followers are doing when after having 
effected the phenomenological reduction, they treat the noema as unreal and declare 
that its esse is percipi” (EN 16, 27–8; BN l, lxi). Although this quote can be  plausibly 
read that Sartre mistakenly attributes metaphysical idealism to Husserl, however, 
left at that, we would misunderstand Sartre’s deeper underlying concern, namely 
that Husserl makes consciousness do too much work and in a way that cannot escape 
from subjectivity and achieve objectivity. Although Sartre does not put matters quite 
in this way, the robust reading of Husserl’s ontology (given above) does not defuse 
the skeptic’s bomb (cf. EN 270–71; BN 218), and, perhaps, this parallels post- 
Kantian German Idealists who found Kant’s noumena susceptible to skeptical 
threats. 29 
 To be sure, Sartre’s reading of Husserl’s noema preys on a conceptually abstruse 
point. Husserl claims, “its essence [the noema] consists exclusively in its ‘percipi’—
except that this proposition does not have the Berkeleyian sense because here the 
essence does not include the percipi as a really inherent piece” (I, §98). While Sartre only 
mentions the  ﬁ rst Berkeley-sounding half of the quote, Husserl splits a thin theoreti-
cal hair with the second half. On one thin hair-half, Husserl claims that the noema 
does not depend upon the stream of consciousness (I, §97). Hence, Husserl believes 
himself to escape metaphysical idealism. On the other thin half, Husserl argues that 
the noema (qua illuminated meaning-unities after reduction) is not self-suf ﬁ cient, 
 29  For an exceptional account of post-Kantian German Idealism and this kind of concern, see 
Frederick Beiser,  The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte (Cambridge: 
Harvard UP, 1987). 
341
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
i.e., it cannot exist independently of consciousness (I, §98). Thus, it appears that 
Husserl holds a transcendental notion of constitution, insofar as consciousness must 
actively do something in order to illuminate the noema as meaningful. 30 
 Problematically, nothing warrants Husserl’s claim that the noema exhibits robust 
ontological independence from consciousness. Given Husserl’s claims that the 
“stuffs” or “hyletic-Data” that compose noema are “animated” by consciousness 
(noesis) with “sense-bestowals” (I, §97, see also §85 and §88), Sartre sees Husserl 
as teetering precariously on the edge of metaphysical idealism, and this explains 
why Sartre designates Husserl a “phenomenalist” who “ borders on Kantianism” 
(BN, 71,  emphasis added ). 31 In Sartre’s view, Husserl delivers knowledge of brack-
eted [things] only as they essentially and/or phenomenally are but not as they  factu-
ally are. So understood, Husserl looks as if he makes consciousness the measure of 
all being (known) in some Kantian sense (EN 23–4; BN lvii), while putting reality 
permanently out of play. Consequently, Sartre argues that Husserl fails to escape 
subjectivity in the Kantian sense, by making consciousness do too much cognitive 
work in detaching our knowledge from noumenal reality (EN 27–34; BN lx–lxvii). 
 To be sure, Sartre accepts that Husserl came very close to solving the perennial 
puzzle of cognition (crudely put, how do subjects know objects or how does subjec-
tivity lead to objectivity), but that he ended up, for a lack of better words, reefed on 
Kantian rocks. According to Sartre, the problem of cognition cannot be solved with-
out  ﬁ rst taking “the ontological exigencies of the percipi” into primary consider-
ation (EN 24; BN lvii) and these “exigencies” cannot be properly grasped if one 
prioritizes epistemology. 
 Ontological Priority 
 Like Descartes, Kant and pretty much all modern philosophers, Sartre claims that 
Husserl succumbs to “the illusion of the theoretical primacy of knowledge” (EN 21; 
BN liv). The illusion of the primacy of knowledge comes into vogue when the defeat 
 30  To be fair, Husserl offers only rudimentary remarks on the details of constitution in  Ideen I . 
Husserl spells out constitution in greater detail in  Ideen II ; however, Sartre did not have access to 
this text. So although Sartre may overreach in reading Husserl as overly Kantian, given the textual 
ambiguities surrounding the ontological status of noema, Sartre’s reading of  Ideen I is understand-
able, if not plausible. 
 31  It might be noted that pheneomenalism does not (necessarily) deny the existence of an indepen-
dent world. Rather it claims that our access to the world is always mediated by something like sense 
data. Phenomenalists are, in other words, sometimes indirect realists but not necessarily whole hog 
metaphysical idealists. Now the claim that Husserl holds anything like indirect (representational) 
realism surely goes wrong and Sartre knows this. Husserl denies everything like (pictorial) mental 
representations that would need to be matched onto the world qua represented (I, §43, §52 and §90) 
and Sartre accepts Husserl as having made philosophical progress in abandoning this kind of embar-
rassing dualism (BN xlvi). So Sartre is either just confused or his worry lies elsewhere.  
342
M.C. Eshleman
of skepticism is, pace Descartes, taken to be philosophy’s  ﬁ rst task. Instead of focusing 
on actual factual relationships,  pace  ontology, which seems vulnerable to skeptical 
attack, Husserl focuses on ideal epistemic relations amongst meaning unities and 
essences. Consequently, Husserl makes knowledge depend upon transcendental con-
sciousness in a way that (at least appears to) overemphasize consciousness’s role in 
the constitution of objectivity. However, if the reduction reveals our unmediated con-
tact with factual being, then the priority of epistemology is unnecessary. 
 Sartre, in other words, supposes that Husserl’s phenomenological method deliv-
ers a revolutionary insight that forces us to abandon part of the very method that led 
to such insights in the  ﬁ rst place. If the phenomenological reduction puts us in 
unmediated contact with intentional objects, which, in turn, motivates the collapse 
of the appearance/reality distinction (and its noumena/phenomena sibling), then we 
need not put existence claims out of play. This collapse  entails what we might call 
“anomalous direct realism,” namely the view that we enjoy a direct, pre-cognitive 
experience of things that exist independently of our apprehension. What makes 
Sartre’s direct realism “anomalous” is that while he agrees with the transcendental 
idealist that consciousness must necessarily do something, cognitively speaking, 
this activity cannot add anything (like forms of intuition, categories, or meanings) 
to the object grasped. 
 Four theses summarize Sartre’s solution to the problem of cognition. First, only 
upon the basis of a non-cognitive apprehension of being (in-itself) can we render 
our epistemic relationship to the world intelligible. Second, our ontological expla-
nation of the pre-cognitive apprehension must  necessarily  employ an account of 
non-being and negation. Third, negation enters the world through the activity of 
consciousness, which does not add anything to the disclosed world, qua unmediated 
grasp. Fourth, Sartre arrives at these three theses via transcendental arguments. 
 Sartre’s Phenomenological Ontology 
 Thesis One 
 Sartre  argues that “by considering being as the  condition of disclosure but not as 
an appearance which can be determined in concepts, we have understood that 
knowledge cannot by itself give an account of being, i.e., the being of the pheno-
mena cannot be reduced to the phenomena of being” (BN xlix, emphasis added, 
translation modi ﬁ ed). 32 Three observations should be made here: 
 First, in saying that being cannot be grasped in concepts, Sartre, in part, means 
our basic relationship to the world occurs before predicative judgments in the form 
 32  As Sartre argues earlier, “we … have apprehended a being which is not subject to knowledge and 
which founds knowledge, a thought which is de ﬁ nitely not given as a representation or a 
signi ﬁ cation of expressed thoughts, but which is directly apprehended such as it is and this mode 
of apprehension is not a phenomenon of knowledge but is the structure of being … Thus we have 
attained the ontological foundation of knowledge…” (lvii). 
343
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
of “S is P” arise. The most we can say about being grasped in a non-epistemic way, 
is simply that it is. 33 Simply put, we grasp “that it is” (or being’s that-ness) before 
we come to know “what it is” that we grasp. 
 Second, Sartre, like Husserl, splits a theoretical hair. This distinction between the 
being of the phenomena (BP) and the phenomena of being (PB) roughly breaks 
down along the same lines as Husserl’s analysis of the noema. Qua condition for 
disclosure, BP exhibits ontological independence; however, qua disclosed as dif-
ferentiated phenomena, it exhibits ontological dependence. However, and this is 
crucial, while PB qua differentiation requires the activity of consciousness, this 
activity does not add anything to the being disclosed, otherwise objective knowl-
edge cannot be secured. If consciousness adds anything in the process of cognition, 
we can only say that we know the way in which things appear “to us” but not how 
they really are. 
 Third, Sartre’s characterization of BP as a “condition for disclosure” amounts to 
a transcendental argument that consciousness would be impossible were there no 
mind-independent being to support its existence (EN 27–29), though the details of 
this particular argument cannot be given here. However, while consciousness 
depends upon being and not the other way round, the independent being of pheno-
mena delivers only one necessary (and, hence, non-phenomenal) condition for 
the disclosure of a differentiated world. The second necessary condition concerns the 
activity of consciousness that merely negates being and introduces non-being as a 
transcendentally ideal but objective structure of differentiated reality. 
 Thesis Two 
 Sartre argues that any coherent account of embodied consciousness’ ontological 
inter-relationship with being qua differentiated world must necessarily employ 
negation and non-being. While the theoretical temptation to understand negation in 
merely epistemic and/or semantic terms has been historically overwhelming, Sartre 
argues that negation must be understood,  ﬁ rst, in ontological terms, as a non- 
substantial activity, and, second, in epistemic terms qua condition for the possibility 
of knowledge. The activity of negation constitutes four kinds of transcendentally 
ideal but objectively real structures of reality. First, it provides the condition for the 
possibility of concrete experiences of non-being, e.g., discovering a friend’s absence 
upon an expected meeting or that a slice of my freshly baked pie is missing. Second, 
it makes possible imagining non-existent objects. Third, it carves out negative space 
that outlines any  ﬁ gure on its background. Fourth, it makes negative judgments 
possible. 
 33  Of course, Sartre actually says more than just that being is. He also says that, ontologically 
speaking, being (in the mode in-itself) is self-identical and contingent. These other claims cannot 
be here discussed. 
344
M.C. Eshleman
 Thesis Three 
 While consciousness necessarily plays an active role in disclosure, it cannot do too 
much work. Objectivity must be anchored in objects and not in transcendental sub-
jectivity. As seen, transcendental idealism theoretically overburdens consciousness 
and severs any hope of anchoring objectivity in independent objects. For this rea-
son, the activity of consciousness must be wholly negative. It does not add anything 
to cognition, e.g., work up sense data into cognitive objects, pace Kant and perhaps 
Husserl. Rather, it constitutes non-being as a transcendentally ideal but objectively 
real part of reality. To put matters somewhat oxymoronically, the existence of non-
being is to be perceived. 
 Thesis Four 
 Sartre arrives at these three theses via transcendental arguments grounded in pheno-
menological descriptions of pre-judicative lived experience. The conclusions of these 
transcendental arguments sometimes establish (purportedly) robust ontological 
claims about the structure of embodied consciousness’s interrelationship with the 
world. To establish this controversial point, a few words on what a transcendental 
argument is are necessary. 
 TAs exhibit two distinctive features. Robert Stern characterizes “the  ﬁ rst, and 
perhaps most de ﬁ nitive feature,” namely, “that [transcendental] arguments involve a 
claim of a distinctive form: namely that one thing (X) is a necessary condition for 
the possibility of something else (Y), so that (it is said) the latter cannot obtain without 
the former.” 34 While necessary conditions come in different kinds, e.g., epistemic, 
logical, ontological, causal etc., since empirical claims cannot establish genuinely 
necessary truths, transcendental conclusions must go beyond the content of perception. 
So understood, conclusions to transcendental arguments are  a priori . The second 
distinctive feature is that the necessary conditions amplify our knowledge. This 
means that the relationship between (X) and (Y) cannot be true merely by de ﬁ nition, 
since analytic truths do not amplify our knowledge. For this reason, the conclusion 
must not only be  a priori but also  synthetic . 35 
 34  See his introduction to his edited volume,  Transcendental Arguments: Problems and Prospects 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999), 3. 
 35  For example, the necessary condition for a man’s being a bachelor is a man’s being unmarried. 
This necessity, however, involves no transcendental inference, since the necessary condition “being 
unmarried” follows merely by de ﬁ nition, and, therefore, it does not amplify our knowledge of 
bachelors. 
345
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
 With this in mind, Sartre poses what might be aptly labeled “the fundamental 
question” (FQ) of  L’Être et le néant in transcendental terms, namely “what must 
man and the world be in order for a relation between them to be possible” (EN 38; 
BN 4). Sartre then asks whether some practical activity can help us characterize “the 
very structure of these beings” (ibid). 36 As is well known, FQ itself provides the 
conduct that reveals our basic relationship to the world, namely the activity of asking 
questions. 37 Sartre rapidly draws his  ﬁ rst transcendental conclusion. Namely, the 
necessary condition for the possibility of asking pre-predicative questions is “the 
permanent possibility of [experiencing] non-being,” i.e., not  ﬁ nding an answer to 
one’s question (EN 38–9; BN 5). If every time someone asked a question, they nec-
essarily arrived at an answer, then there would be no such thing as inquiry as such. 
 While this might not seem to amplify knowledge in a properly transcendental 
way, Sartre argues for three further clearly amplifying claims. First, nothingness 
must ontologically structure the mode of being of consciousness internally and not 
externally. Second, this internal structure makes the disclosure of (external) non-
being possible. Third, these two claims together supply the ontologically necessary 
conditions for the possibility for consciousness’s ability to disclose a differentiated 
world, and, hence, to know it. Before turning to the details of Sartre’s transcendental 
inferences, a general characterization of Sartre’s basic ontological “insight” might 
help frame this matter more clearly. 
 If our most primitive ontological ‘building blocks’ include only being and noth-
ingness, there are only two logically possible ways to account for consciousness and 
its relationship to the world. The  ﬁ rst way of atomistic materialism locates nothing-
ness external to being and it explains “consciousness” in terms of a complex whole 
made up of  independent material parts, where empty space separates the parts, 
e.g., atoms that compose a brain. So understood, everything that exists does so in 
exactly the same way, where the only difference between any two things, e.g., a 
brain and any other non-conscious entity, comes down to degrees in complexity but 
not ultimately to a difference in kind. In contrast, the second way of modal dualism 
characterizes consciousness as complex whole composed of  dependent temporal 
moments. While both views accept ontological monism, namely that there exists 
only one kind of being, unlike atomism that distinguishes between wholes merely 
in terms of complexity, modal dualism holds that being exists in essentially different 
kinds of ways. 
 36  Sartre explicitly rejects Kant’s formalistic approach (TE 13–16; EN 38; BN 3), which asks after 
the conditions necessary for the possibility of any experience whatsoever. For this reason, it seems, 
Sartre begins with particular concrete experiences like pre-judicative question asking; see fn. 37. 
Saying precisely how Sartre and Kant differ goes beyond the scope of this essay. 
 37  While Sartre begins with abstract theoretical questions (like the FQ), he emphasize practical 
questions (like why does my car not start) and he concentrates on pre-predicative questions, for 
reasons given above, i.e., pre-cognitive questions that arise before explicit predicative judgment. 
E.g., upon hearing a sound outside the door, I spontaneously look but see that nobody is there. On 
the basis of this spontaneous questioning, I may form the predicative judgment, “S. Richmond has 
not arrived.” 
346
M.C. Eshleman
 Sartre’s distinction between kinds of “modes of being” does not refer to modality 
in the logical sense of necessity and contingency. Rather, ontological modality 
refers to the most basic ways in which being relates to nothingness. Nothingness 
stands in either an internal or external relationship to being. That is it. These two 
basic options exhaust all of the logically possible combinations. Whereas the mode 
of being of material reality (the in-itself) exists solely in external relationships; 
the mode of being of embodied consciousness (for-itself) exists as an internally 
distended being by nothingness. When understood this way, Sartre’s most general 
criticism of atomistic materialism is that (ontologically speaking) it reduces 
everything to external relationships, and, hence, leaves out one possible relationship 
between being and nothingness. 
 Sartre ties non-reductive materialism to modal pluralism and works out a view in 
advance of its time. On the one hand, Sartre rejects Cartesian substance dualism, and, 
on the other, he accepts a non-reductive materialism that attempts to explain for the 
emergence of consciousness in ontological terms. With that said, while consciousness 
both depends upon and is irreducible to matter, this does not mean that consciousness 
should be identi ﬁ ed with nothingness. While commentators commonly interpret 
Sartre as holding the mysterious view that “consciousness is nothingness,” Sartre 
never literally says this. Embodied consciousness is an internally mixed mode of 
being, temporally distended by nothingness that, ontologically speaking, is not what 
it is and is what it is not. Otherwise put, the title of  L’Etre et le néant neither could 
nor should have been La Matière et la conscience . 
 The gist of Sartre’s transcendental argument goes like this: Only an account of 
being qua internally distended by nothingness  can adequately explain (in ontologi-
cal terms) embodied consciousness-in-the-world and (in epistemic terms) the pos-
sibility of negative facts and judgments about them. The crux of Sartre’s 
transcendental argument is as simple as it is elegant. “The  necessary condition for 
our saying ‘not’ is that non-being be a perpetual presence  in us and  outside of us …” 
(EN 46–7; BN 11, emphasis added). Given that the necessary condition for the pos-
sibility of our interrogation of the world is the possible disclosure of negative facts 
(e.g., “it’s not the carburetor,” “there are not sixteen-hundred francs in my pocket,” 
and “Pierre is not here”) and given that there is nothing real about negative facts, 
i.e., no actual feature of the material world can cause us to apprehend them. They 
must, necessarily,  ﬁ nd their source in the activity of consciousness. 
 Sartre invents a word  néantisation (translated as  nihilation ) to characterize the 
necessary X condition for the possibility of (Y) consciousness’s ability to negate 
and transcend what it is conscious of and disclose  négatités (negative facts). His 
risky argument, simpli ﬁ ed, is as follows.
 i. 
 Being can only generate being. 
 ii.  Non-being qua  négatité cannot be generated by being. 
 iii.  Hence, consciousness must be their source qua negating activity. 
 Now this conclusion is genuinely amplifying. The concept of a (pre-judicative) 
negative fact does not analytically imply the claim that only the activity of con-
sciousness can be its source. As their source, the mode of being of consciousness 
must somehow contain nothingness internally. This follows according to premise 1. 
347
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
If consciousness were characterized merely in terms of being, we could not explain 
the constitution of negative facts. As Sartre put is, “nothingness lies coiled in the 
heart of being,” to which he should have added  in the heart of the being of “con-
sciousness” (EN 57; BN 21). 
 In turn, this ontological account of negation qua  néantisation  grounds Sartre’s 
epistemology. To know what anything is, requires,  ﬁ rst, that consciousness distinguish 
itself from that which it knows, and, second, that it distinguishes the objects which it 
grasps from other objects. To know that P, e.g., that my car is red, this requires 
knowing ~ P, e.g., that red is not blue. And so too with all knowledge; each bit implies 
negation. For this reason, Sartre reverses Spinoza’s scholastic claim that all deter-
mination is negation ( omnis determinatio est negatio ) and argues that negation is 
necessary for any determination (EN 51–52; BN 16). Sartre expresses the tightly-knit 
relationship between ontology and epistemology when he argues, “‘non-being’ is 
 implied a priori in every theory of knowledge . It is impossible to conceive the notion 
of [a determinate] object if we do not originally have a negative relation designating 
the object as that which is not consciousness” (EN 222; BN 173, emphasis added). 
Consequently, the inferred ontological description of the structure of consciousness 
as  néantisation (of itself and the world) provides a transcendentally necessary onto-
logical condition that explains the possibility of knowledge but it does so in a way that 
the activity of consciousness adds nothing to the being of what it knows.  
 Expository Conclusion 
 If one overestimates Sartre’s phenomenological commitments, as a great number of 
able commentators do, then, as Sebastian Gardner argues, “the ontology talk in  Being 
and Nothingness would then be either a rhetorical shadow … or the result of a simple, 
non-transcendental inference from the appearances.” 38 To be sure, more than a few 
commentators have found Sartre’s inference from a mundane description of our 
pre-judicative experiences (of interrogation and negative facts) to ontological con-
clusions about the nature of consciousness puzzling. 39 However, my efforts here have 
not been meant to defend Sartre per se, but rather to champion the  transcendental 
reading over what we might call “strongly phenomenological readings” (SPR). David 
Detmer  indicates  something like SPR when he claims Sartre’s ontology “attempts to 
describe the fundamental categories of being and their interrelations,” but it is not 
“about what kind of entity consciousness might be.” 40  See also A. R. Manser who 
 38  “The Transcendental Dimension of Sartre’s Philosophy,”  Reading Sartre , ed. Jonathan Webber 
(London: Routledge: 2010), 51. 
 39  See for examples, Alvin Plantinga’s impressive but hasty essay, “An Existentialist’s Ethics,”  The 
Review of Metaphysics 12/2 (Dec., 1958), 235–56 and Sarah Richmond’s eloquent “Sartre and 
Bergson: A Disagreement about Nothingness,”  International Journal of Philosophical Studies 
15/1 (2007): 77–95. 
 40  Detmer,  Sartre Explained (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 2008), 63–64. 
348
M.C. Eshleman
argues that Sartre’s ontology “is concerned with a  phenomenological description of 
experience,” i.e., “of appearance rather than reality.” 41 Sartre, however, does not arrive 
at the ontological structure of (embodied) consciousness as a kind of being distended 
internally by nothingness via pure description, pace Husserl sans the reduction. 
Rather, he deduces such claim transcendentally. 
 This helps to explain why Sartre’s twisted, ontological characterization of 
embodied consciousness as ‘ a being which is what it is not and which is not what it 
is ’ should not be understood as straightforwardly descriptive. Sartre does not simply 
read this phrase off of experience; rather he deduces it on the basis a transitive series 
of transcendental inferences. These inferences supply the ontologically necessary 
conditions that make bad faith possible. Perhaps considerations like these motivate 
Thomas Flynn’s quali ﬁ cation of SPR when he claims that Sartre’s ‘ontology is 
 primarily descriptive and classi ﬁ catory.’ 42 My efforts here can be summarized as 
showing why Sartre’s ontology is not entirely descriptive. 
 With that said, while Jeffery Wilson correctly observes that “Sartre gives no 
detailed indications of the method of his ontology,” his claim that “the line between 
description and explanation in  Being and Nothingness is dif ﬁ cult if not impossible 
to draw” over relies on descriptive expectations. 43 If we suspend such expectations 
and pay close attention to the text, the transcendental dimension shows itself clearly, 
as Gardner has convincingly shown. On this reading, Sartre’s ontological character-
ization of consciousness as a being distended by “ néantisation ” is at once descrip-
tive and explanatory. It describes what consciousness is, contra Detmer, and it 
explains how it is possible for consciousness to relate to the world and know it. 
Thus, the line between description and explanation is dif ﬁ cult but not impossible to 
draw, because Sartre’s transcendental inferences are simultaneously ontological 
characterizations and amplifying explanations. 
 Historical Conclusion 
 If Aristotle placed ontology  ﬁ rst and Descartes placed it second, one can read Kant as 
eliminating ontology altogether in favor of epistemology. 44 Descartes’ failure to over-
come skepticism motivates Kant to throw the skeptic a rather large bone. Even if we 
cannot know reality as it is in itself (the bone), Kant believed himself to have limited 
knowledge to a sphere purportedly unassailable to skepticism, namely to the tran-
scendental conditions for knowing how things appear. Thus, Kant rejected traditional 
 41  A.R. Manser, “Sartre and ‘ Le Néant ’”  Philosophy 36/137 (1961): 177–87. 
 42  This quote comes from Flynn’s  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Sartre. 
 43  See his essay “Metaphysical Questions in Sartre’s Phenomenological Ontology,”  Sartre Studies 
International 6/2 (2000): 52–53. 
 44  Reading Kant in this way is not uncontroversial. Alternatively, Kant may be said transform the 
relationship between ontology and epistemology and set the debate upon new grounds. 
349
20 Jean-Paul Sartre and Phenomenological Ontology 
ontological claims (as inaccessible and entirely susceptible to skepticism), and he 
replaces it with transcendental epistemology, namely the necessary epistemic condi-
tion for the possibility of knowledge. In this way, Kant may be said to reject the study 
of being qua being but accept the study of being qua how it appears and is known “by 
us.” However, in rejecting traditional ontology by ruling out constitutive claims about 
noumena, Kant reintroduced a rather large theoretical gap for skeptical worries. 
 Husserl arguably narrows this gap. From an eidetic analysis of phenomena qua 
phenomena, he can be plausibly read as reaching being qua being in a historically 
novel fashion. This conceptual revolution melds phenomenology with ontology; 
however, it does so, according to Sartre, at the cost of giving any illuminating onto-
logical account of our factual relationship to the world. Even if Sartre overreaches 
in his interpretation of Husserl, perhaps matters can be put like this. If Kant’s nou-
menal realm amounts to large  ﬁ ssure for skeptical wedges, Husserl narrowed but 
did not entirely close the gap. In contrast, attempts to more seamlessly wed ontol-
ogy to epistemology, by locating transcendental inferences at the level of situated 
descriptions. Crucially, Husserl made Sartre’s effort possible when he argued that 
“it is fundamentally erroneous to believe that perception (and, after its own fashion, 
any other kind of intuition of a physical thing) does not reach the physical thing 
itself” (I §43). 
 However, if one must bracket transcendent being in order to realize that we have 
been in contact with it all along, Sartre argues that the physical thing no longer 
needs to be bracketed. In accepting the collapse of what has been a cardinal philo-
sophical distinction between being and appearances, Sartre employs transcendental 
arguments in a way that plausibly do more labor than Kant would allow and in a 
way that brings phenomenology down to factual earth. Unlike Kant, for whom tran-
scendental arguments establish  merely epistemic conditions necessary for the pos-
sibility of knowledge (of how things appear); and unlike Husserl, for whom we can 
read these epistemic conditions descriptively off of phenomena via eidetic intuition, 
Sartre employs transcendental arguments that establish the ontological conditions 
that render our relationship to the world intelligible. 
 To the skeptic who raises her doubting eyes, Sartre replies that the negation 
required for doubt itself presupposes that which the skeptic wishes to deny, namely 
the negating activity of consciousness and its factually necessary intentional grasp 
of an independent world. 45 
 45  I would like to thank Lester Embree and Tom Nenon for all of their helpful suggestions and also 
for their work putting such a  ﬁ ne collection of essays together. I would also like to thank a blind 
referee for critical remarks. While the revisions motivated by these critical remarks will not be 
fully satisfying, hopefully they have improved the essay. 
351
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_21, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Beauvoir and the  Ideen  
 Unlike other major  ﬁ gures in the French phenomenological movement, Simone de 
Beauvoir makes few explicit references to Husserl, and not one single reference to 
the  Ideen . However, Husserl’s in ﬂ uence—while indirect—is clear both thematically 
and, to a degree, methodologically. Beauvoir’s familiarity with Husserlian phenom-
enology can be summarized in three textual moments: her reading of his lectures on 
internal time consciousness; her autobiographical commentaries on Jean-Paul 
Sartre’s position on the transcendental ego; and her review of Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s 
 La phénoménologie de la perception . While the two  ﬁ rst indicate an awareness of 
Husserl’s early analyses of intentionality and transcendental subjectivity, the third 
testi ﬁ es to a profound understanding of the central themes of genetic phenomenology. 
One of Beauvoir’s most original contributions to phenomenological research is 
based on this understanding. Her analysis of the meaning of sexual difference for 
individual and cultural constitution of subjectivity in  Le deuxième sexe presuppose 
a Husserl’s distinction between functioning and objectifying intentionality, as well 
as his anti-naturalist conceptualization of the lived body ( Leib ). 
 In the autobiographical volume covering the years 1929 to 1944,  La force de 
l’âge , Beauvoir makes one of her few explicit references to speci ﬁ c texts by 
Husserl:
 I also dipped into Husserl for the  ﬁ rst time. Sartre had told me all he knew about Husserl: 
now he presented me with the German text of  Leçons sur la conscience interne du temps , 
which I stumbled through without too much dif ﬁ culty. Every time we met we would discuss 
 U.  Björk (*)
 Department of Philosophy, Uppsala University,  Uppsala ,  Sweden 
e-mail:  ulrika.bjork@ ﬁ loso ﬁ .uu.se 
 Chapter 21 
 Simone de Beauvoir and Life 
 Ulrika  Björk  
352
U. Björk
various passages in it. The novelty and richness of phenomenology  ﬁ lled me with enthusiasm; 
I felt I had never come so close to the real truth. 1 
 The relation between temporality and selfhood is a central theme in Beauvoir’s 
ethical essays from the 1940s. 2 It is given a historical and political dimension in  Le 
deuxième sexe , and—as will become clear in the following essay—is particularly 
evident in her  ﬁ ve volume autobiography as well as in her late study of aging. 3 
Preceded by a discussion of narrating one’s own past, Beauvoir’s last autobiographical 
volume,  Tout compte fait , sketches an analysis of “life” as an intentional object. 4 
 Even more direct evidence of Beauvoir’s familiarity with phenomenology is 
found in a statement about the being and knowledge of transcendental subjectivity:
 [T]o this day I still believe in the theory of “the transcendental Ego” ( l’Ego transcendental ); 
the ego ( moi ) is only a probable object, and anyone saying “I” knows it only in pro ﬁ les; 
another can have a clearer and more correct picture. 5 
 Here Beauvoir makes a distinction between the transcendental ego ( l’Ego ) , the 
ego as an object ( moi ) and I ( Je ). She further suggests that from the perspective of 
the speaking subject—that is, for the one who says “I”—the knowledge of the ego 
referred to as a worldly object is only probable. Someone else can have a more 
certain knowledge of me ( moi ). 
 Most scholars have interpreted this passage in line with Sartre’s critique of 
Husserl’s transcendental ego in  La transcendance de l’ego , originally published in 
1936. 6 This interpretation is questionable, however, since it is not clear from the 
brief autobiographical evidence what, exactly, Beauvoir means by the transcendental 
 1  Simone de Beauvoir,  The Prime of Life , trans. Peter Green (New York: Lancer Books, 1962), 241; 
 La force de l’âge (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1969), 231. The text referred to is the original 1928 
publication of a series of lectures that Husserl gave in 1905, republished and supplemented in 1969 
as  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917),  ed. Rudolf Boehm.  Husserliana 
X (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff). 
 2  Simone de Beauvoir,  Pyrrhus et Cinéas (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1944);  Pour une morale de 
l’ambiguïté (Paris: Éditions Gallimard 1947). 
 3  Simone de Beauvoir,  La vieillesse (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1970). 
 4  Simone de Beauvoir,  Tout compte fait (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1972). 
 5  Beauvoir,  The Prime of Life , 444 (trans. modi ﬁ ed);  La force de l’âge , 419: “Je crois encore 
aujourd’hui à la théorie de ‘l’Ego transcendantal’; le moi n’est qu’un objet probable, et celui qui 
dit  je  n’en saisit que des pro ﬁ ls; autrui peut en avoir une vision plus nette ou plus juste.” The context 
of this statement is a discussion of the motivation to write autobiography. The exposition of her 
life, Beauvoir says, is based on her conviction that one cannot know oneself ( se connaître ), only 
tell about oneself ( se raconter ). 
 6  Jean-Paul Sartre,  La transcendance de l’ego. Esquisse d’une description phénoménologique (Paris: 
Vrin 1978). In this essay, Sartre offers a critique of the Husserlian notion of a supposed transcenden-
tal ego or subject, and presents his own non-egological theory of consciousness. What he aims to 
show is that there is no “I” or ego behind our conscious experiences, neither as a formal condition 
of possibility, nor as a real or material inhabitant of consciousness ( conscience ), but that the ego is 
outside consciousness. As he writes; the ego “is a being of the world, like the ego of another.” 
 The Transcendence of the Ego: An Existentialist Theory of Consciousness , trans. Forrest Williams 
& Robert Kirkpatrick (New York: Hill & Wang, 1960), 31;  La transcendance de l’ego , 13.  
353
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
ego. Is it identical with the ego considered as an object, with the one who says 
“I,” or distinguished from both? Beauvoir’s understanding of Sartre’s ontology is, 
moreover, far more nuanced than the view he presents in this early text. In a com-
mentary on Sartre’s later thought, she questions the dualist interpretation of his 
ontology, according to which consciousness as pure transcendence is distinguished 
from concrete, transcendent being. On de Beauvoir’s alternative interpretation, the 
transcendental subject is understood as a genetic and affective meaning-giving structure, 
one which underlies all empirical and re ﬂ ective experience. 
 Husserl publicly introduced genetic phenomenology to the French audience in 
two lectures given in Paris in 1929. 7 There is no evidence that Beauvoir attended 
Husserl’s lectures. 8 The knowledge we have of Beauvoir’s familiarity with this stage 
of Husserl’s thought comes from her review of  La phénoménologie de la perception 
in 1945 and from her employment, via Merleau-Ponty, of Husserl’s concept of the 
lived body in  Le deuxième sexe , published in 1949. 9 
 In her very positive review of Merleau-Ponty’s study, Beauvoir cites phenome-
nology’s discovery of a pre-scienti ﬁ c and pre-ethical perceptual  ﬁ eld—a  ﬁ eld that 
precedes both science and ethics, and which relativizes the separation between both 
self and other and self and the world—as one of its most important contributions. 
What Beauvoir recognizes in Merleau-Ponty’s work is an “intentional network” on 
the level of sense-experience, which has a founding role in the constitution of 
perceptual experience and its objects. 10  Phenomenology, she writes, restores to us 
the spontaneous movement of life and returns our right to an authentic existence. 11 
She also draws attention to how phenomenology makes it possible to investigate 
this existence (as it is present in naїve or non-thematized experience) by means of 
an attitude that differs from, and therefore can be directed towards, “natural” 
experience. She refers to this particular re ﬂ ective attitude as the phenomenological 
attitude ( l’attitude phénoménologique ). It is primarily as a novelist that Beauvoir 
investigates “authentic existence.” Her novels, she explains, are attempts to recapture 
 7  The lectures given in Paris form the basic structure of  Cartesian Meditations , which appeared 
originally in French in 1931 and in the  ﬁ rst  Husserliana volume in 1950. Edmund Husserl, 
 Méditations cartésiennes. Introduction à la phénoménologie , trans. Gabrielle Peiffer Emmanuel 
Levinas (Paris: A. Colin);  Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge , ed. S. Strasser 
(The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950). 
 8  Cf. Simone de Beauvoir,  Mémoires d’une jeune  ﬁ lle rangée (Paris: Éditions Gallimard 1958); 
 Les écrits de Simone de Beauvoir. La vie – l’écriture , eds. Claude Francis & Fernande Gontier 
(Paris: Éditions Gallimard 1977), 33–34. In the spring of 1929, Beauvoir was completing her 
studies at Sorbonne and École normale supérieure, working on a thesis on the meaning of the 
concept in Leibniz’ philosophy, and preparing her teaching diploma, the French “agrégation de 
philosophie.” 
 9  Simone de Beauvoir, “ La phénoménologie de la perception  de Merleau-Ponty,”  Les temps modernes 
1/2 (novembre): 363–67;  Le deuxième sexe I & II (Paris: Éditions Gallimard 1949). 
 10  Beauvoir, “A Review of  Phenomenology of Perception ,” 162; “ La phénoménologie de la perception 
de Merleau-Ponty,” 365. 
 11  Beauvoir, “A Review of  Phenomenology of Perception ,” 159–60; “ La phénoménologie de la 
perception de Merleau-Ponty,” 363. 
354
U. Björk
a pre-ethical level of experience, driven by life’s contradictions, nuances and 
ambiguities. 12 The writer does not express the lived meaning of subjectivity under 
the form of knowledge ( savoir ), but rather under the form of the intimate and singularly 
lived experiences themselves. 13 
 Whereas subjectivity on the level of functioning intentionality is a sensuous, 
affective, driven and—in this sense— passive becoming, subjectivity on the level of 
act intentionality is an  active becoming, one in which a personal self constitutes 
itself in relation to the world and to others. In  Le deuxième sexe , Beauvoir develops 
this central Husserlian idea by studying how subjective becoming as a singularly 
lived yet intersubjective reality is necessarily sexed. 14 
 The references to phenomenology in  Le deuxième sexe are not unambiguous, but 
they are explicit and convincing, and appear throughout the original two volumes. 
To give just one example, the “enormous advance” of psychoanalysis over psycho-
physiology, Beauvoir claims, is that “no factor intervenes in psychic life without 
having taken on human meaning.” 15 With an indirect but clear reference to pheno-
menology, she adds that it is not the “body-object ( corps-objet ) described by scientists” 
that exists, but the “body lived by the subject” ( corps vécu par le sujet ). In other 
words, what is crucial for femininity and masculinity is the lived experience, rather 
than objective biological features that may not be part of this experience. 
 Beauvoir’s studies of biology, psychoanalysis and historical materialism in the 
 ﬁ rst volume of  Le deuxième sexe lead her to the anti-naturalist conclusion that none 
of these theoretical frameworks, taken by themselves, can explain how the hierarchy 
 12  Simone de Beauvoir,  La force des choses II (Paris: Gallimard 1963), 62. 
 13  Simone de Beauvoir, “Mon expérience d’écrivain,”  Les écrits de Simone de Beauvoir. La vie 
– l’écriture , eds. Claude Francis & Fernande Gontier (Paris: Éditions Gallimard 1977), 446. 
Beauvoir’s “poetics” explicitly draws on Kierkegaard’s distinction between direct and indirect 
communication, but her intuition about the philosophical value of literature echoes Husserl’s in 
 Ideen I , §70: “Extraordinary pro ﬁ t can be drawn from the offerings of history, in even more 
abundant measure from those of art, and especially from poetry, which are, to be sure, imaginary, 
but which … tower high above the products of our own phantasy.”  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to Pure 
Phenomenology , trans. F. Kersten.  Collected Works II (Dordrecht, Boston & London: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1982), 160;  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie. Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie , ed. Walter Biemel. 
 Husserliana III (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1950), 132. 
 14  Le deuxième sexe is thus a signi ﬁ cant contribution to what Husserl himself calls “the problem of 
the sexes,” a problem he viewed as an area for future phenomenological research. See Husserl, 
 The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology: An Introduction to 
Phenomenology,  trans. David Carr (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1970), 188;  Die 
Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung 
in die phänomenologische Philosophie , ed. Walter Biemel,  Husserliana VI (The Hague, 
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1954), 191–92. 
 15  Beauvoir,  The Second Sex , trans. Constance Borde & Sheila Malovany-Chevallier (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 2009), 49;  Le deuxième sexe I .  Les faits et les mythes (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 
1949), 80. 
355
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
between the sexes has been established. Rather, the facts provided by the sciences 
need to be understood from the perspective of the individual’s total existential situation. 
To be sure, sexual difference has to be studied objectively, from the perspectives of 
science, history and a cultural imaginary, but—Beauvoir maintains—it also has to 
be studied subjectively, from the perspective of women’s lived experience 
( expérience vécu ). 
 “What Is This Curious Object?” Some Re ﬂ ections on Life 
 For an experienced event is  ﬁ nite—at any rate, con ﬁ ned to one sphere of experience; a 
remembered event is in ﬁ nite, because it is only a key to everything that happened before it 
and after it. 
 —Walter Benjamin, “The Image of Proust” 16 
 In the  ﬁ rst part of  Homo Sacer,  Giorgio Agamben writes that “the Greeks had no 
single term to express what we mean by the word ‘life.’” 17  He then famously draws 
attention to two different Greek terms for life:  zoē and  bios . Whereas  zoē “expressed 
the simple fact of living common to all living beings (animals, men, or gods),” he 
claims  bios “indicated the form or way of living proper to an individual or a group.” 18 
The difference for the Greeks, in other words, was between natural or “bare life,” 
and a quali ﬁ ed life, or a way of life, like that of a politician or a philosopher. 
Agamben’s inquiry does not concern this distinction as such, but rather its constitutive 
role for Western de ﬁ nitions of politics. 19 His initial remark concerning our under-
standing of the word “life” is therefore left undeveloped. 
 My question here does not concern the distinction between  zoē  and  bios , but the 
contemporary meaning of the word “life.” In my view this meaning is far from clear. 
Does “life” have, as Agamben implies, a single, uni ﬁ ed meaning? Etymologically, 
the English word “life” has Indo-European roots and can be traced back to the word 
 16  Illuminations: Essays and Re ﬂ ections, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Schocken Books, 1969), 
202;  Illuminationen: ausgewählte Schriften (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1961), 336. “Denn ein 
erlebtes Ereignis ist endlich, zumindest in der einen Sphäre des Erlebens beschlossen, ein erinnertes 
shrankenlos, weil nur Schlüssel zu allem was vor ihm und zu allem was nach ihm kam.” 
 17  Giorgio Agamben,  Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life , trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998), 1;  Homo sacer. Il potere sovrano e la nuda vita 
(Turino: Giulio Einaudi, 1995), 3. “Life” is a translation of the Italian word  vita . 
 18  Agamben,  Homo Sacer , 1;  Homo sacer (original), 3. 
 19  In response to Michel Foucault’s claim that the politicization of bare life, or the entry of  zoē into 
politics, constitutes “the decisive event of modernity” (when natural life is included in the mechanisms 
and calculations of State power, politics turns into “biopolitics”), Agamben argues that Western 
politics as such is founded on the exclusion of bare life, or on the exceptional status of  homo sacer 
(4);  Homo sacer (original), 7. What characterizes modern politics is the gradual coincidence of  zoē 
and  bios ; through modern democracy (and subsequently totalitarianism) bare life is not only liberated, 
but turned into a way of life. 
356
U. Björk
 lib , meaning to remain, persevere and continue. 20 It is also related to the German 
words  Leib (body) and  bleiben (to remain). Used in a generic sense, “life” thus 
comes close to ancient Greek meanings of  zoē (life) as well as  zoön (living being, 
animal). 21 But what do we mean by the more modern idea of an individual human 
life, my life or your life? What are the conditions for describing life as personally 
lived? The aim of this essay is to offer a re ﬂ ection on the meaning of a singular 
human life. This re ﬂ ection is inspired by Simone de Beauvoir’s autobiographical 
descriptions of her life as a “curious” temporal object, and by more general 
phenomenological and existential analyses of the meaning of the past for the becoming 
of a person. The temporal frame evokes questions about memory and the relation 
between the present and the past. What does it mean to have a past? Can the past be 
clearly distinguished from the present? Is the past  ﬁ xed or changing? Does the past 
determine the present (and indeed the future), or is the past rather determined by the 
way one understands one’s present life? What is the relation between the past and 
remembering? Are there different ways of remembering? Is it possible to retrieve 
one’s life through memory? 
 There is one modern conception of “life” that is not covered by the distinction 
between  zoē and  bios . I am thinking of  élan vital , coined by Henri Bergson in 1907. 
In  L’évolution créatrice , Bergson de ﬁ nes  élan vital as an “original impetus of life” 
( élan originel de la vie ), passing from one generation of seeds to the next, through 
the developed organisms which bridge the interval between the generations, or “an 
internal push that has carried life, by more and more complex forms, to higher and 
higher destinies.” 22 As carried by this  élan or impetus, life does not proceed by the 
association and addition of elements, but by “ dissociation and division ” ( dissociation 
et dédoublement ). 23 Bergson describes life in terms of a “tendency,” the essence of 
which is “to develop in the form of a sheaf, creating, by its very growth, divergent 
directions among which its impetus is divided.” 24 
 What is interesting with regard to our understanding of an individual human life 
is Bergson’s claim that this force of “dissociation and division” is not limited to 
nature, but is operative in the development of a personality as well. We can observe 
this change in ourselves, according to him, if we consider the evolution of the tendency 
 20  The Oxford Dictionary of Word Histories, ed. Glynnis Chantrell (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2002), 301. Cf.  The Bernhard Concise Dictionary of Etymology , ed. Robert K. Bernhart 
(New York: Harper Collins, 1995), 432. 
 21  The de ﬁ nition Aristotle, for instance, gives of  zoē is the capacity for self-nutrition, growth and 
decay: “Of natural bodies some have life ( zoē ) in them, others not; by life we mean self-nutrition 
and growth and decay” ( On the Soul , II 412a).  The Complete Works of Aristotle , ed. Jonathan 
Barnes (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), 656. 
 22  Henri Bergson,  Creative Evolution , trans. Arthur Mitchell (Lanham: University Press of America, 
1983), 87, 102;  L’évolution créatrice (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1948), 95, 111. 
 23  Bergson,  Creative Evolution , 89 (italics in original);  L’évolution créatrice , 97. 
 24  Bergson,  Creative Evolution , 99;  L’évolution créatrice , 108. 
357
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
we call our character. 25 In Bergson’s view, our “child-personality,” though indivisible, 
uni ﬁ es in itself diverse “persons.” These persons can remain blended in childhood 
because they are in their nascent state, or in a state of indecision. However, in 
the course of growth, they become incompatible, and as each of us can only live one 
life, we are forced to make a choice. In reality, Bergson admits, this choice is not 
one: we choose continuously, and continuously abandon many things. The lives we 
come to live are therefore scattered with “the remains of all that we began to be, of 
all that we might have become ( devenir ).” 26 
 As an example, I think of the diverse personas that were uni ﬁ ed in my own 
“child-personality”: the piano-player, the singer in girl’s choirs, the school girl, the 
traveller to summer camps, the reader, the diary-writer. Some of these personas have 
remained; I read, I write, I travel to conferences. I occasionally sing, but I no longer 
play the piano. Were the piano-player and the singer forever lost as I abandoned 
their development? 
 In the last volume of her autobiography,  Tout compte fait , Simone de Beauvoir 
questions Bergson’s understanding of life as a movement of differentiation and division, 
and instead gives her own description of the becoming of a distinct personality. 
According to her, Bergson’s view implies that “in realizing ourselves we lose most 
of our possibilities.” 27 Considering her own life as a concrete example, she presents 
a different view:
 Certainly when I was twelve I was tempted by paleontology, astronomy, history, and every 
fresh branch of learning I chanced upon; but they all formed part of the larger project of 
discovering the world, a project that I followed steadily. 28 
 From the beginning she was “amorphous” ( informes ) rather than “manifold” 
( multiple ), Beauvoir concludes. The development of a personality, in other words, is 
in her view a continuous shaping or forming of something formless, rather than a 
process of differentiation and division. The original character is not lost in this 
becoming, but de ﬁ ned: the little girl of three years she once was, Beauvoir illustrates, 
lived on, grew calmer, in the girl of 10, that child in the woman of 20, and so on, and 
she also recognizes herself through life’s changes. 29 Following this line of thinking, 
my childhood piano lessons are clearly part of a more general project of de ﬁ nition—of 
 25  Bergson,  Creative Evolution , 100;  L’évolution créatrice , 109. For a detailed discussion of the 
ambiguous meaning of  élan vital , see, e.g., John Mullarkey,  Bergson and Philosophy (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 1999). According to Mullarkey,  élan vital is often used as an equivalent 
of life, spirit, and consciousness (80). For a critique of Bergson’s concept  élan vital , and the 
philosophy of life associated with it, see Hannah Arendt,  The Human Condition (Chicago & 
Oxford: Chicago University Press, 1998), 117, 311–13. 
 26  Bergson,  Creative Evolution , 100;  L’évolution créatrice , 109. 
 27  Simone de Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , trans. Patrick O’Brian (New York: Paragon House, 
1993), 2 (trans. modi ﬁ ed);  Tout compte fait , 46. “…qu’en nous réalisant nous perdons la plupart de 
nos possibilités.” 
 28  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 29;  Tout compte fait , 46. 
 29  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 29–30;  Tout compte fait , 46 –47. 
358
U. Björk
my original character, to be sure, but also of what, in the course of time, formed 
itself into a speci ﬁ c life of education and self-expression. But how is it possible to 
recognize oneself—one’s original character—throughout life’s changes? 
 In his phenomenological analyses of the consciousness of time, Edmund Husserl 
insists that the identity of one’s individual life is dependent on memory and, more 
precisely, on the different modes of remembering he calls  recollection and  retention . 
Husserl’s analyses, which are abstract in the sense that they concern the form of 
time and not the concrete “I,” were presented in a series of lectures from 1905. 30 In a 
summary of his main insights in  Ideen I (1913), he distinguishes the subjectively 
lived time from cosmic or objective time, but also underlines their interdependence. 31 
Without the subjective experience of time, the objective time of the world—and by 
implication the sharing of ideas through communication—would not be possible. 
As Rudolf Bernet writes in a comparison of memory in Husserl, Proust, and Barthes, 
“for Husserl, the act of recollection … assures not only the identity of the object and 
thereby the possibility of science, but also the personal identity of the subject.” 32 
What does recollection and retention mean and why does Husserl  ﬁ nd it necessary 
to distinguish these different forms of memory? 
 Recollection is what we ordinarily think of as remembering. As an intentional 
act—that is, an act directing itself towards an object (the past experience)—recollection 
 re-presents the past, it makes something that was once given or perceived present 
again, but in the form of a “past present.” 33  In  Confessions , Augustine gives an 
illuminative concrete description of this experience of remembering:
 I distinguish the odor of lilies from that of violets without smelling anything at all. I prefer 
honey to a sweet wine, a smooth taste to a rough one, not actually tasting or touching at the 
moment, but by recollection. 34 
 Contra Augustine’s theory of memory, it is crucial for Husserl that the re-presented 
past is not present as mental images. 35 Recollection gives the past experience originally. 
In the present act of remembering, I voluntarily “live through” the experience again, 
while being aware that it is past. This is also what distinguishes recollection from 
 30  Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917), ed. Rudolf 
Boehm,  Husserliana X (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969). 
 31  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie , ed. Walter Biemel,  Husserliana 
III (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1950), 161–62. 
 32  Bernet, Rudolf, “Framing the Past: Memory in Husserl, Proust and Barthes,”  The Husserlian 
Foundations of Phenomenological Psychology (Pittsburgh: The Simon Silverman Phenomenology 
Center, Duquesne University Press, 1993), 5. 
 33  Husserl,  On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893–1917), trans. John 
Barnet Brough  Collected Works IV (Dordrecht, Boston & London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1991), 43, 47;  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins, 41, 45. 
 34  Saint Augustine,  Confessions , trans. Henry Chadwick (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 186. 
 35  According to Augustine, we experience objects through perception, but what remains available 
to memory are the images of the perceived objects ( Confessions , 186). 
359
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
retention, which is an “immediate” functioning or operative memory that accounts 
for the possibility of the “double presence” of recollection, that is, the presence of 
the remembered past as well as my (present) awareness of remembering. 36 Retention 
accounts for the continuity between the past and the present and is what makes 
recollecting memory, and the identity of one’s life, possible. 
 In retention, I am passively aware of the present that has just past, and (ideally) 
of the whole chain of elapsed “now moments.” As an immediate or primary memory, 
retention belongs to the consciousness of the present, which is consequently not 
fully present, but only present in a blending of presence and non-presence––of what 
is “now” and what is “not now.” The present, in other words, is a temporal fringe or 
horizon, consisting not only of the “now” and the “just-past,” but also of the 
“just-coming.” 37 Husserl even considers the “now” of the living present an ideal 
limit where the “new” or “not yet” moments of the present passes into the “just 
past.” 38 The proper place for present awareness, as Bernet concludes on the basis of 
Husserl’s analysis of the living present, is in-between the present and the past. 
Consciousness “apprehends itself as being what it has already ceased to be.” 39 
Thanks to the living present and the chain of retentions that assures the continuity 
between the present and the past, however, nothing that has been present to con-
sciousness can ever be lost by it. Keeping in mind that memory, for Husserl, is not 
a “storehouse” of images, he would agree with Augustine that the “vast  ﬁ elds and 
palaces of memory” preserve everything that we have perceived “to be recalled 
when needed and reconsidered.” 40 In Husserl’s epistemologically motivated theory 
of memory “the past of a person will always remain accessible and does not require 
any operation of deciphering or decoding in order to be re-appropriated.” 41 
 Amongst the phenomena preserved by memory in Augustine’s early Christian 
theory of memory is his own past self. With the exception of infancy—which is lost 
in the “darkness” of forgetfulness—Augustine assures that in memory he meets 
himself and recalls what he is, what he has done, and when and where and how he 
was affected when he did it. 42 In contrast to Augustine’s religious perspective—as 
well as to Husserl’s epistemological—Beauvoir’s existential study of ageing,  La 
vieillesse , presents a more melancholic (and skeptical) view about the possibilities 
 36  Husserl,  On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , 44 –51;  Zur 
Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins, 42–49; cf. Bernet, “Framing the Past,” 3– 4. 
 37  Husserl,  Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , 27, 41;  Zur Phänomenologie des 
inneren Zeitbewusstseins, 25–26, 39. 
 38  Cf. Husserl,  On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , 42;  Zur 
Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins, 40. 
 39  Bernet, “Framing the Past,” 4. 
 40  Saint Augustine,  Confessions , 185– 86. 
 41  Bernet, “Framing the Past,” 5. 
 42  Saint Augustine,  Confessions , 10, 186– 87. Infancy, for Augustine, is on the level of life lived in 
his mother’s womb and he feels no responsibility for a time he cannot recall (10). 
360
U. Björk
to remember. The past can hardly be recalled, Beauvoir writes, she does not meet 
herself there and in memory the living meaning of what was once present is lost:
 The past is not a peaceful landscape lying there behind me, a country in which I can stroll 
wherever I please, and which will gradually show me all its secret hills and dales. As I was 
moving forward, so it was crumbling. Most of the wreckage that can still be seen is colorless, 
distorted, frozen: its meaning escapes me. Here and there, I see occasional pieces whose 
melancholy beauty enchants me. They do not suf ﬁ ce to populate this emptiness that 
Chateaubriand calls “the desert of the past.” 43 
 This experience of an evasive and fragmentary past motivates Beauvoir to ask 
how far memory allows us to retrieve our lives. Her brief summary of the French 
psychiatrist Jean Delay’s conception of recognition through memory draws attention 
to other forms of remembering, alongside recollection and retention. 
 In  Les dissolusions de la mémoire , a philosophical dissertation from 1942, Delay 
distinguishes three different modes of recovering the past. 44 The  ﬁ rst is what he calls 
the sensor-motor memory. Here, memory is “a matter of action and not of thought”; 
remembering is made up of “series of montages and automatic forms of behavior 
that obey the laws of habit” (my ability to play the piano might still be preserved in 
this kind of memory). The second form of remembering is so-called autistic memory. 
This kind of memory is governed by the dynamics of the unconscious and activates 
the past “in dreams and deliriums in a paralogical and affective mode.” 45  In autistic 
memory, the subject is unaware of remembering, but still relives past impressions in 
the present in the form of neuroses. Contrary to sensor-motor memory, through 
which the past cannot be consciously retrieved, it is possible to use autistic memory 
for the aim of re-knowing or recognizing the past. This, Beauvoir observes, is what 
psychoanalysts attempts to do. She thus identiﬁ es autistic memory with the kind of 
remembering Sigmund Freud in 1914 introduced as  repetition . 46 
 The frame of Freud’s discussion of remembering (and of forgetting) is psycho-
analytic treatment, where the aim is to  ﬁ ll in gaps in memory and overcome 
resistances due to repression. As distinguished from conscious remembering of 
something that was forgotten or disguised, Freud de ﬁ nes repetition as a kind of 
memory by which the patient acts out what he or she has forgotten, rather than 
remembers it. The past is (unknowingly) reproduced as an action rather than as a 
memory. In repetition, the patient acts out the symptoms of the illness, but also 
inhibitions, attitudes and character-traits that have made their way “from the sources of 
 43  Beauvoir,  Old Age , trans. Patrick O’Brian (Hammondsworth: Penguin Books, 1970), 407;  La 
vieillesse , 388. 
 44  Beauvoir,  Old Age , 404;  La vieillesse , 385. 
 45  Beauvoir,  Old Age , 404;  La vieillesse , 385. 
 46  Sigmund Freud, “Remembering, Repeating and Working-Through,”  The Case of Schreber, 
Papers on Techniqe and Other Works. Standard Edition, vol. XII (1911–1913) , trans. James 
Strachey with Anna Freud (London: The Hogarth Press, 1958), 147–56; “Erinnern, Widerholen 
und Durcharbeiten,”  Gesammelte Werke. Zehnter Band: Werke aus den Jahren 1913–1917 
(Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer Verlag, 1966), 126 –36. 
361
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
the repressed into his manifest personality.” 47 The compulsion to repeat convinces 
Freud that the psychic illness must be treated as a “present-day force,” rather than 
an “event of the past.” 48 In comparison to Husserlian recollection, where recognition 
takes place when a conscious “I” directs itself to, and relives, an experience from 
the past, repetition is a “memory in the present,” which needs deciphering in order 
to be recognized. 
 Turning back to Beauvoir’s summary of Delay’s theory, the third form of 
remembering is so-called social memory. As distinguished from sensor-motor 
memory and autistic memory, social memory is an intellectual operation that—not 
unlike recollection—“reconstructs and localizes past facts, basing itself upon 
physiological data, images and a certain knowledge, and making use of logical 
categories.” 49 As Beauvoir remarks, social memory is the remembering that enables 
us, to some degree, to tell ourselves our own history. 
 Like recollection or repetition, telling ourselves our own history as an intellectual 
operation necessarily has a certain frame. 50  In the case of autobiography, this frame 
is a literary creation in which although it is not completely  ﬁ ctional experiences 
pass through artistic con ﬁ guration of time in the form of a narrative. 51 Less worried 
by the in ﬂ uence of imagination on remembering, Beauvoir understands autobio-
graphical writing as the activity of recreating past events in the form or memory, or 
of “reanimating” the vague images of the past. 52  If a faithful recreation of one’s life 
in the form of autobiography is still impossible, this is not only due to the failure of 
memory, according to her, but also to the nature of the object that is to be described. 
The past, as well as the life one has lived, cannot be possessed or known in the way 
one possesses or knows a thing. Life is a “detotalized totality” ( totalité-détotalisée ), 
which—in the frame of French existential philosophy—implies that it  is not, or has 
no being. 53 
 47  Freud, “Remembering, Repeating and Working-Through,” 151; “Erinnern, Wiederholen und 
Durcharbeiten,” 131. 
 48  Freud, “Remembering, Repeating and Working-Through,” 151; “Erinnern, Wiederholen und 
Durcharbeiten,” 131. 
 49  Beauvoir,  Old Age , 404;  La vieillesse , 385. 
 50  This is Bernet’s main claim in his essay on memory in Husserl, Proust and Barthes; every memory, 
and indeed every analysis of memory, is in need of being framed (8). 
 51  For a discussion of the experience of time and  ﬁ ctional narrative, see Paul Ricoeur,  Temps et récit 
II. L’expérience temporelle  ﬁ ctive (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1984), especially 150–255; cf. Bernet, 
“Framing the Past,” 7–13. 
 52  Beauvoir, “Mon expérience d’écrivain,” 452. 
 53  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2;  Tout compte fait , 12; cf. “Mon expérience d’écrivain,” 443. In  La 
force des choses Beauvoir is more speci ﬁ c about the “totality” that a life constitutes. It is diverse 
and  ﬂ uid, and its most characteristic aspect is that it changes with time and implies “transformations, 
ripening and irreversible deteriorations.”  After the War: Force of Circumstance I , 276;  La force des 
choses I , 375–76. See also  La vieillesse : “[L]ife is an unstable system in which the balance is 
continually lost and continually recovered … Change is the law of life” ( Old Age, 17;  La 
vieillesse , 17). 
362
U. Björk
 As distinguished from earlier volumes, where memories are chronologically 
reproduced and related, Beauvoir’s aim in the last volume of her autobiography is to 
examine her history through certain given concepts and notions. 54 Once again, she 
considers her childhood and youth, her friendships and love relations, and the deaths 
that have moved her—this time, however, from the perspective of the play between 
chance, circumstance and choice. The possibility of these re ﬂ ections depends on the 
temporal remoteness in which her life can appear as a totality: “[t]he nearer I come 
towards the end of my existence, the more I am enabled to see that strange thing, a 
life, and to see it whole.” 55 
 In what has been viewed as a Proustian opening scene of  Tout compte fait , 
Beauvoir depicts a childlike surprise at waking up in her own room, after having 
fallen asleep during the day. 56 What surprises the subject of the autobiography, however, 
is not primarily the possibility of being unexpectedly reminded of places where she 
once lived, or the temporary forgetting of her identity between being asleep and 
being fully awake, but to  ﬁ nd herself deeply embedded in this life, at this time, and 
not in any other life. “Why am I myself?” the narrator asks. 57  This question 
motivates a deliberate will to remember:
 At present I am concerned with recovering my life––reviving forgotten memories, re-reading, 
re-seeing, rounding off incomplete pieces of knowledge,  ﬁ lling gaps, clarifying obscurities, 
gathering scattered elements together. 58 
 While her own birth and sex seem unlikely in the  ﬁ rst place, subject to chance 
and contingency, her own existence is at the same time not contingent. “If I had not 
been born no question would have arisen: I have to take the fact that I do exist as my 
starting point.” 59 She continues her inquiry in two directions. First, she studies the 
ambiguity of her individual life: “My life: it is both intimately known and remote; it 
de ﬁ nes me and yet I stand outside it. Just what, precisely, is this curious object 
( bizarre objet )?” 60  Second, she investigates her life with regard to the mode in which 
it was formed. The two lines of inquiry intersect, since in the latter case life is 
considered a particular kind of temporal object. 
 54  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 3;  Tout compte fait , 13. In addition to this initial investigation, 
Beauvoir continues in the last autobiographical volume to recount her primary occupations during 
the most recent past: reading, writing, travelling, and, more than ever between 1962 and 1972, 
engaging herself in the political events of her time. 
 55  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , “Prologue” (trans. modi ﬁ ed);  Tout compte fait , 9. “Plus je me rapproche 
du terme de mon existance, plus il me devient possible d’embrasser dans son ensemble cet étrange 
objet qu’est une vie.” 
 56  Leah Hewitt draws attention to the intertextual connection between  Tout compte fait and the  ﬁ rst 
volume of Marcel Proust’s  À la recherché du temps perdu, Du côté de chez Swann , in 
 Autobiographical Tightropes: Simone de Beauvoir, Nathalie Sarraute, Marguerite Duras, Monique 
Wittig, and Maryse Condé (Lincoln & London: University of Nebraska Press, 1990). 
 57  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done, 1;  Tout compte fait , 11. 
 58  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 39;  Tout compte fait , 60. 
 59  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 1;  Tout compte fait , 11. 
 60  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 1–2;  Tout compte fait , 12. 
363
21 Simone de Beauvoir and Life
 In her attempt to describe this “object,” Beauvoir begins by stating that it is at 
once boundless ( illimité ) and  ﬁ nite ( ﬁ ni ). 61 A singular life is boundless,  ﬁ rst in the 
sense that it runs back to the beginnings of the world and to its utmost limits. “In my 
being,” she writes, “I sum up the earthly inheritance and the state of the world at this 
moment.” 62 In an earlier passage, she makes a similar claim about the “mirroring” 
of her individual history, and of her surrounding world. Every moment of her life 
re ﬂ ects her own past, her body, her relations with others, the task she has undertaken, 
the society and world in which she lives. 63  For a biographer, the “inexhaustible 
multiplicity of relationships” that each element in an existence maintains with the 
whole of being is therefore impossible to reproduce. This is even more so, as each 
of these elements has a meaning that differs with the perspective from which it is 
viewed. “The fact ‘I was born in Paris’,” Beauvoir illustrates, “does not represent 
the same thing to a Parisian, to a person from the provinces, and to a foreigner.” 64 
Even if the city has an objective or intersubjective reality, the apparent simplicity of 
the statement is scattered among the millions of individuals who have a relation to 
Paris. 
 However, a life is also a  ﬁ nite reality ( réalité  ﬁ nie ) in the sense it has a center of 
interiorization, and this center is an “I” ( je ) which poses itself as identical through 
all moments. 65 As  ﬁ nite, furthermore, a life inscribes itself in a certain endurance 
( durée ) and is located; it has a beginning and an end, evolves in given places, retains 
the same roots and constitutes an unchanging past, whose opening towards the 
future is limited. 66 The idea of a frozen past thus returns in the autobiography. But 
is the past really  ﬁ xed? 
 While Beauvoir uses metaphorical  ﬁ gures related to death in order to describe 
the past—“desert,” “skeleton,” “a butter ﬂ y pinned in a glass case”—she also claims 
that it is the future that decides whether the past is living or not. 67 Drawing on Jean-Paul 
Sartre’s analyses in  L’être et le néant and  Critique de la raison dialectique , she 
understands the past in terms of the  in-itself that the  for-itself leaves behind, and, 
more precisely, as a whole formed by all that one has done, and by the way one has 
de ﬁ ned oneself in relation to it. 68 The past, in other words, is rei ﬁ ed praxis, or what 
 61  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2;  Tout compte fait , 12. 
 62  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2;  Tout compte fait , 12. 
 63  Beauvoir,  After the War: Force of Circumstance I , 275–76;  La force des choses I , 374. 
 64  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2 (trans. modi ﬁ ed);  Tout compte fait , 12. “Ce fait: ‘Je suis née à 
Paris’ ne représente pas la même chose aux yeux d’un Parisien, d’un provincial, d’un étranger.” 
 65  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2;  Tout compte fait , 12; cf.  La force de l’âge , 419. 
 66  Beauvoir,  All Said and Done , 2;  Tout compte fait , 12. 
 67  Beauvoir,  Old Age , 407;  La vieillesse , 388. 
 68  Beauvoir,  Old Age , 415;  La vieillesse, 395; cf. Sartre,  L’être et le néant .  Essai d’ontologie 
phénoménologique (Paris: Librairie Gallimard, 1943), 150–74;  Critique de la raison dialectique, 
I (Paris: Librairie Gallimard, 1960), e.g., 154, 231–32 and Livre I: “De la ‘praxis’ individuelle au 
pratico-inerte.” 
364
U. Björk
Sartre calls the “practico-inert.” The past in this sense is an imperative or “calling.” 
It possesses us in that it objectively or publicly de ﬁ nes our present and ourselves; it 
sets the subject up as Another (as the author of these books or the player of these 
piano concerts). Remembering, from this perspective, is an attempt to attain the 
impossible synthesis of the  in-itself  and the  for-itself . As such, it will not bring 
the past back to life, or ourselves as we existed then. The only way in which we can 
retrieve the past, and in some sense possess it, is by binding the past to a project that 
transcends it. 
 Returning to my initial re ﬂ ections, if being a child means either being in a nascent 
state of indecision (Bergson) or being formless (Beauvoir), being an adult means 
having become de ﬁ ned by the “calling” of one’s own past, and to actively respond 
to that calling. This does not imply any teleology or determinism. Beauvoir’s point 
is precisely that the persons we become, and the lives we come to live, are not given, 
but are the result of a development that acquires a certain pattern in the course of 
time. To take my life as an example, musical practice forms part of that pattern but 
it does not possess me in the sense of a personal “calling.” I can remember, and even 
sense, what it was like singing Christmas Carols in a candlelight procession, or 
performing a piano piece during a concert at the end of the school year. But these 
experiences remain subjective memories, even “melancholic islands” in a past I cannot 
totally grasp. My “living past” (the practices that transcend the past into the present) 
is the intersubjective reality that teaching, writing and publishing—in short, the 
academic life—has become. This reality now de ﬁ nes me from the “outside” and 
gives meaning to my individual life as a way of life, or a  bios . 
365
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_22, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The  Ideen and Merleau-Ponty 
 While a student at the École Normale Supérieure, Merleau-Ponty attended 
Edmund Husserl’s lectures at the Sorbonne in February of 1929, though nothing 
suggests that the two men ever met. Nonetheless, Husserl exerted a more profound 
and continuous in ﬂ uence on Merleau-Ponty’s thought, from his  ﬁ rst writings to 
his  ﬁ nal unpublished work, than any other single thinker. 1 The majority of 
Husserl’s students and followers take their starting point in a critique of speci ﬁ c 
aspects of his method, but Merleau-Ponty’s approach is distinctive. He recognizes 
in Husserl’s thought many of the same tensions, ambiguities, and contradictions 
noted by other readers, yet for Merleau-Ponty these are indications of the success 
of Husserl’s descriptions; the tensions and contradictions in Husserl’s thought 
are evidence less of methodological  ﬂ aws than of genuine insights into the matters 
themselves, the ambiguities inherent in re ﬂ ecting on our historical and embodied 
existence. Merleau-Ponty’s distinctive contribution to phenomenology rests in 
his willingness to take such tensions seriously in their own terms, a project that 
he understands to be profoundly faithful to Husserl’s guiding intentions and better 
lights. That the paradoxes which Merleau-Ponty’s investigations take as their 
perennial themes—embodiment, intersubjectivity, time, expression, nature—often 
 ﬁ nd their original formulation in Husserl’s texts, to which Merleau-Ponty constantly 
 T.  Toadvine (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  University of Oregon ,  Eugene ,  OR ,  USA 
 Department of Philosophy and Environmental Studies , 
 University of Oregon ,  Eugene ,  OR ,  USA 
e-mail:  Toadvine@uoregon.edu 
 Chapter 22 
 Maurice Merleau-Ponty 
and Lifeworldly Naturalism 
 Ted  Toadvine   
 1  For a detailed summary of Merleau-Ponty’s reading of Husserl throughout his career, see my 
“Merleau-Ponty’s Reading of Husserl: A Chronological Overview,”  Merleau-Ponty’s Reading of 
Husserl , ed. Ted Toadvine and Lester Embree (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2002), 227–86. 
366
T. Toadvine
returns for inspiration, is a measure of the master’s abiding in ﬂ uence. For Merleau-Ponty, 
Husserl work deserves our enduring attention precisely because it holds no pretension 
to reach de ﬁ nitive conclusions but rather confronts us with the most profound 
philosophical conundrums without recoiling from or attempting to sever their 
Gordian core. Even when Merleau-Ponty expresses reservations about Husserl’s 
approach, as he does from the outset and increasingly in later years, his assess-
ments focus on Husserl’s resistance to the implications of his own descriptions, 
so that underlying these criticisms we can still read an act of faithfulness. In an 
interview in the last year of his life, when Merleau-Ponty notes that he has long 
been in ﬂ uenced by Husserl, the interviewer asks when he broke with this philosophy: 
“Oh, it started from the beginning,” he answers, but then adds: “For that matter, 
is it a break?” 2  
 Merleau-Ponty demonstrates an awareness of  Ideen I at the outset of his career, 
citing this text in several of his  ﬁ rst publications from the mid 1930s. 3 He  ﬁ rst 
mentions  Ideen I in his 1934 application to the Caisse National des Sciences for 
renewal of a grant to study the nature of perception, where he describes Husserl’s 
phenomenology as “doubly interesting,” since, thanks to the reduction and the shift 
to a transcendental perspective, it offers an entirely new philosophy distinct from 
Kantian critical thought and de ﬁ nitively distinguishes psychological from phenom-
enological approaches to perception. 4  Citing  Ideen I  explicitly, Merleau-Ponty attributes 
to Husserl’s work the potential for a “renewal of the principles of psychology,” and 
he echoes Aron Gurwitsch’s claim that Husserl’s analyses “lead to the threshold of 
 Gestaltpsychologie .” 5 This theme of the convergence or mutual complementarity of 
phenomenology and Gestalt theory guides Merleau-Ponty’s thinking in his  ﬁ rst thesis 
in 1938,  La structure du comportement . Although Husserl receives no explicit 
discussion in this text, several of his works, especially  Ideen I , are cited as key 
sources, especially the description of perceptual form as an intentional rather than a 
physical object, its perspectival presentation by way of pro ﬁ les, and its implication 
in relations of motivation rather than causality. 6 When, in the conclusion of  Structure , 
 2  Merleau-Ponty, “La philosophie et la politique sont solidaires,”  Parcours deux 1951–1961 
(Lagrasse: Verdier, 2000), 303 (my translation). 
 3  Ideen I  is cited in Merleau-Ponty’s 1935 review of Scheler’s  Ressentiment (“Christianisme et 
 ressentiment,”  Parcours 1935–1951  [Lagrasse: Verdier, 1997], 18, 19; “Christianity and  Ressentiment 
(1935),” trans. Gerald Wening,  Texts and Dialogues , eds. Hugh Silverman and James Barry Jr. [Atlantic 
Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1992], 90, 91), and themes from  Ideen I are also discussed in 
Merleau-Ponty’s 1936 review of Sartre’s  Imagination (“L’Imagination,”  Parcours 1935–1951 , 51–54; 
“On Sartre’s  Imagination (1936),” trans. Michael B. Smith,  Texts and Dialogues , 112–13).  
 4  Merleau-Ponty, “La Nature de la perception,”  Vers une nouvelle philosophie transcendentale , ed. 
Theodore Geraets (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1971), 190–91; “The Nature of Perception: Two 
Proposals (1933),” trans. Forrest Williams,  Texts and Dialogues , 77. 
 5  “La Nature de la perception,” 191; “The Nature of Perception,” 77, 78. 
 6  For references to  Ideen I , see  La Structure du comportement  (Paris: PUF, 1942), 155, 175, 186, 201, 
& 235;  The Structure of Behavior , trans. Alden Fisher (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1963), 
143, 162, 172, 186, & 218. Other texts by Husserl cited here include  Méditations cartésiennes ,  Formale 
und transzendentale Logik , and  Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusztseins .  
367
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
Merleau-Ponty de ﬁ nes the “phenomenological reduction” as a “return to perception 
as to a type of originary experience in which the real world is constituted in its 
speci ﬁ city,” he presents this as concordant with the de ﬁ nition of the reduction in 
Husserl’s later work. 7 
 In April of 1939, Merleau-Ponty visited the newly established Husserl Archive in 
Louvain, as its  ﬁ rst international guest, to consult the unpublished typescript of  Ideen 
II  and other manuscripts . 8  Although his visit lasted only  ﬁ ve days, Merleau-Ponty’s 
brief study of this text—which he would later describe as “ une expérience presque 
voluptuese ”—clearly informs  Phénoménologie de la perception ’s analyses of embodi-
ment and perceptual experience. 9  Ideen II  is cited only once, concerning the body’s 
incomplete constitution, but the manuscript’s descriptions also inform Merleau-Ponty’s 
accounts of the body as an “I can” and as the zero-point of spatial orientation, the self-
forgetfulness of the perceiving subject in the natural attitude, and the constitution of 
optimal norms of perception, to name only a few examples. 10 The  Phénoménologie also 
introduces Merleau-Ponty’s interpretation of the development of Husserl’s thought as 
having started with a “logicism” or “philosophy of essences” and turning later toward 
an “existentialism” engaged in describing the  Lebenswelt , with the  Ideen occupying a 
transitional middle period characterized by a “classical conception” of intentionality 
and emphasis on the  Sinngebung of consciousness. 11  
 After the  Phénoménologie , Merleau-Ponty devoted several courses partially 
or entirely to Husserl, of which the 1950–1951 Sorbonne course, “Les sciences de 
l’homme et la Phénoménologie,” and the 1956–1957 Collège de France course, 
“The Concept of Nature,” discuss  Ideen in the most detail. “Les sciences de l’homme 
et la Phénoménologie” traces the development of Husserl’s account of the relation 
between philosophy and the human sciences of psychology, linguistics, and history, 
providing Merleau-Ponty’s most straightforward and sympathetic exposition of 
Husserlian intentionality, eidetic intuition, and phenomenological reduction. 
For Merleau-Ponty, the transcendental approach of  Ideen I is a sophisticated effort 
to negotiate between logicism and psychologism and points the later Husserl toward 
 7  See  La Structure du comportement , 236;  The Structure of Behavior , 220, 249n56. 
 8  For a detailed account of Merleau-Ponty’s visit and the texts consulted, see H. L. Van Breda, 
“Maurice Merleau-Ponty et les Archives-Husserl à Louvain,”  Revue de métaphysique et de morale 
67/4 (1962): 410–30; “Merleau-Ponty and the Husserl Archives at Louvain,” trans. Stephen 
Michelman,  Texts and Dialogues , 150–61. Merleau-Ponty mentions  Ideen II as the primary reason 
for his visit in his  ﬁ rst letter to the Archive, and emphasizes again his plans to concentrate on this 
text in his reply to Van Breda’s invitation (412, 413 [French]; 151, 152 [English]). During his visit, 
he consulted Ludwig Landgrebe’s 1925 typed transcription, which would later become the basis 
for the 1952 Husserliana volume. 
 9  Merleau-Ponty’s remark is reported in the “Translators’ Introduction” to Husserl,  Ideas II , trans. 
Richard Rojcewicz and André Schuwer (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989) , xvi. 
 10  For the explicit references to  Ideen II , see  Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 
1945), 108, 465;  Phenomenology of Perception , trans. Colin Smith (London: Routledge Classics, 
2002),105, 472. 
 11  Phénoménologie de la perception , 281n, 317n, 419n, 490;  Phenomenology of Perception , 283n1, 
320n46, 425n8, 498. 
368
T. Toadvine
an increasing recognition of the “reciprocal intertwining [ entrelacement ] or 
envelopment” of philosophy and psychology. 12 
 The course on “The Concept of Nature” locates in Husserl an oscillation between, 
 ﬁ rst, the reduction of nature to a noematic correlate of consciousness, characteristic of 
 Ideen I  and required to overcome the naiveté of the natural attitude; and, second, the 
rehabilitation of the perceived in later writings as the pregiven universe that re ﬂ ection 
presupposes. The mutually enveloping relation between the naturalistic  blosse Sachen 
and the personalistic  Umwelt in  Ideen II is a privileged example of this oscillation, 
whose turning point is the body as subject-object, organ of an “I can,” that occupies 
the zero-point of orientation and founds intersubjective relations. 13 Husserl does not 
overcome the duality of his approach, on Merleau-Ponty’s interpretation, although he 
increasingly recognizes the two paths as complementary and even identical. 
 Merleau-Ponty extends this reading of  Ideen II  in the last and most signi ﬁ cant 
essay he devotes to Husserl, “ Le philosophe et son ombre ,” composed for the cen-
tennial of the latter’s birth in 1959 and laying the groundwork for several key 
concepts in Merleau-Ponty’s  ﬁ nal writings. The essay again traces the dual direc-
tion of Husserl’s descriptions: breaking with nature by effecting the return to tran-
scendental consciousness, yet simultaneously rediscovering nature as the 
 Weltthesis that can never be undone and that the phenomenological reduction 
must therefore also presuppose. This reciprocal envelopment of the natural and 
transcendental attitudes  ﬁ nds its corporeal parallel in the self-sensing of the body, 
which, when touching itself touching, blurs the distinction between subject and 
object. Such corporeal “re ﬂ ection” correlatively blurs the subject/object distinc-
tion within things, entailing an “ontological rehabilitation of the sensible,” so that 
Husserl’s description of the givenness of things “in the  ﬂ esh [ leibhaft ]” can literally 
be taken as referring to a “ ﬂ esh of the sensible,” a notion that will become a cen-
tral tenet of the ontology Merleau-Ponty develops in his posthumously published 
 Le Visible et l’invisible . 14  Tracing the oscillations that he  ﬁ nds in Husserl’s notion 
of constitution, Merleau-Ponty concludes that phenomenology must make the-
matic its own dependence on non-phenomenology, thereby becoming “the means 
of unveiling a back side of things that we have not constituted.” 15 As he puts it in 
his 1958–1959 course on “ La Philosophie aujourd’hui, ” the reduction requires a 
 12  Les Sciences de l’homme et la phénoménologie (Paris: Centre de Documentation Universitaire, 
1975), 45; “Phenomenology and the Sciences of Man,” trans. John Wild, in  The Primacy of 
Perception (Evanston: Northwestern, 1964), 73. Paul Ricoeur’s French translation of  Ideas I 
appeared in 1950 and is cited in this course. 
 13  La Nature, notes, cours du Collège de France (Paris: Seuil, 1995), 102–113;  Nature: Course 
Notes from the Collège de France , trans. Robert Vallier (Evanston: Northwestern, 2003), 70–79. 
See also “Husserl et la notion de nature,”  Parcours deux 1951–1961 , 215–234; Xavier Tilliette, 
“Husserl’s Concept of Nature (Merleau-Ponty’s 1957–58 Lectures),”trans. Drew Leder,  Texts and 
Dialogues , 162–168. 
 14  “Le Philosophe et son ombre,”  Signes (Paris: Gallimard, 1960), 210–11; “The Philosopher and his 
Shadow,”  Signs , trans. Richard McCleary (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), 166–67.  
 15  “Le Philosophe et son ombre,” 227; “The Philosopher and his Shadow,” 180. 
369
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
“fresh mutation” by which it becomes “coextensive with phenomenology,” whereas 
phenomenology must adopt the task of describing the  Lebenswelt as “the universe 
of living paradoxes.” 16 In drawing this conclusion, and indeed throughout his 
readings of Husserl, Merleau-Ponty is clear that his aim is not faithfulness to the 
letter of Husserl’s texts but rather to the unthought that they harbor and that brings 
them perennially to life for us, on the condition that we take as our task thinking 
and expressing this thought anew.  
 Lifeworldly Naturalism 
 It is a commonplace today that humans are part of nature. This truism seems to 
require no further elaboration or justi ﬁ cation. Yet this claim is often presented as 
announcing a radical break with past assumptions about human transcendence and 
exceptionalism, in all of their philosophical and theological variations. If, as humans, 
our being is a part of and continuous with the rest of nature, if we possess no other-
worldly soul or essence that escapes the natural order, then everything that we are 
and do, everything that we experience and create, is explicable in the same terms as 
all other worldly beings and events, notwithstanding any distinctive characteristics 
that we may possess as a species. It follows that even our ability to think, to re ﬂ ect 
on ourselves and the world, to engage in philosophy—including the very act of 
re ﬂ ection on our own naturalness—is itself situated within and emergent from this 
same nature, so that we are inescapably caught up  within what we are re ﬂ ecting 
 from and re ﬂ ecting  on . To be a being that re ﬂ ects on nature, it would appear, is to be 
a bit of nature re ﬂ ecting on itself. 
 Now, the claim that we are part of nature, and that everything that we are and do 
is, in a broad sense, natural, is neither as obvious nor as unequivocal as it  ﬁ rst appears, 
as the long and continuing debate over con ﬂ icting interpretations of “naturalism” 
attests. To agree that humans are a part of nature settles nothing, since at issue then 
is what we  mean  by nature. The philosophical challenge of naturalism is typically 
interpreted as requiring a causal account in physical terms of all aspects of reality, 
including the biological, the social, the mental, and so on. Yet the metaphysical 
naturalist’s contention that “nature is all there is” can be accepted without also granting 
the ontology of the natural sciences or their methods as nature’s de ﬁ nitive and exclusive 
oracle. The physicalist and scienti ﬁ c realist versions of naturalism are not the 
only—nor, arguably, the most philosophically compelling—ways of understanding 
human continuity with nature. 
 16  “Possibilité de la philosophie,”  Résumés de cours, Collège de France 1952–1960 (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1968), 151–52; “Philosophy as Interrogation,” trans. John O’Neill,  In Praise of 
Philosophy and Other Essays (Evanston: Northwestern, 1988), 175–76. Merleau-Ponty’s detailed 
notes from these lectures are published as “La Philosophie aujourd’hui, Cours de 1958–1959,” 
 Notes de cours 1959–1961 (Paris: Gallimard, 1996). 
370
T. Toadvine
 Alternatively, as phenomenology has long argued, this continuity might be 
understood as requiring an enrichment of our ontology, an expansion of our sense of 
nature to include meaning, value, life, subjectivity, community, and so on. This is one 
way to read the progressive complication of the concept of nature in Husserl’s  Ideen 
II , for example, in which the initial de ﬁ nition of nature as the sphere of “mere things” 
embedded within the spatio-temporal causal nexus, i.e., nature in the naturalistic 
sense, is revealed to be derivative from the nature of the surrounding world, the “common 
nature given in intuitive experience,” i.e., a nature that encompasses animal life, other 
persons, cultural values, historical traditions, social community, and so on. 17 If we 
understand this project as an alternative interpretation of what it means for humans to 
be part of nature, starting from a fundamentally distinct and richer conception of 
nature, then we might call phenomenology’s approach a “lifeworldly naturalism.” 
 This phrase will seem paradoxical, of course, for those who know that phenom-
enology has, from the beginning, de ﬁ ned itself in opposition to naturalism. Lester 
Embree opens his entry on “Naturalism” in  The Encyclopedia of Phenomenology 
with the claim that “naturalism has been and remains the main opponent of phenom-
enology.” 18  For Husserl, the “naturalist” who “sees only nature, and primarily physical 
nature,” mistakenly extends the (entirely appropriate) methodological naturalism of 
the sciences into a self-contradictory metaphysical position. 19 The contradiction 
stems from naturalism’s presupposition of consciousness as the condition for any 
meaningful disclosure of the world, while, at the same time, adopting a metaphysics 
within which consciousness can receive no adequate account. 20 What Husserl objects 
to in naturalism, in other words, is the naturalization of consciousness, values, and 
ideas, and his rejection of such naturalization is methodologically essential to 
transcendental phenomenology. 21 
 If what we mean by nature is a “unity of spatio-temporal being subject to exact 
laws,” 22 then we must reject the metaphysical claim that this is all there is, precisely 
because this de ﬁ nition of nature  fails to encompass we who are re ﬂ ecting on it. In other 
words, while claiming to think the human being as a part of nature, the naturalist has 
forgotten to leave any room within nature for the possibility of re ﬂ ection on it, so that 
the naturalist’s philosophizing about nature remains essentially external to this nature. 
If we understand the failure of naturalism in these terms, phenomenology could take as 
its starting point for rejuvenating the concept of nature Husserl’s own investigations of 
 17  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen II , Husserliana IV (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1952), 207;  Ideas II , 
trans. R. Rojcewicz and Andre Schuwer (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989), 218. 
 18  Lester Embree, “Naturalism,”  The Encyclopedia of Phenomenology , eds. Lester Embree et al. 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997), 480. 
 19  Husserl, “Philosophy as Rigorous Science,”  Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy , trans. 
Quentin Lauer (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), 79. 
 22  Husserl,  Ideen I , Husserliana III.1 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), §55;  Ideas I , trans. 
F. Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982), §55; “Philosophy as a Rigorous Science,” 80–81. 
 21  See Dermot Moran’s concise summary of Husserl’s criticisms of naturalism in  Introduction to 
Phenomenology (London: Routledge, 2000), 142–46. 
 22  “Philosophy as a Rigorous Science,” 79. 
371
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
the relationship between living body, soul, and spiritual Ego, insofar as they disclose a 
profound interweaving of consciousness with nature, an interweaving that demands a 
recasting of both its terms in the interest of offering the  ﬁ rst genuine means of thinking 
their continuity. 23 This is precisely the reading of Husserl that Merleau-Ponty proposes 
in his late essay, “ Le philosophe et son ombre ,” where he suggests that Husserl’s  Ideen 
II leads us into that  entre-deux “between transcendent Nature, naturalism’s being in 
itself, and the immanence of spirit.” 24  
 Now, whatever we might think about the faithfulness of this reading of Husserl, 
Merleau-Ponty’s own recuperation of the concept of nature must certainly be under-
stood along these lines. From one angle, his approach is resolutely anti-naturalistic 
insofar as he maintains Husserl’s insistence on the irreducibility of the transcendental 
perspective; consciousness cannot be derived from the universe of  blosse Sachen . 
From another angle, however, Merleau-Ponty is actually pursuing the very project 
of naturalism insofar as he takes seriously the inherence of consciousness in the 
nature from which it emerges; but his manner of describing this inherence pushes 
naturalism beyond itself, since thinking nature from within explodes traditional 
metaphysical categories. And so, when David Wood identi ﬁ es the fundamental 
project of “ecophenomenology” as the development of a “middle ground between 
phenomenology and naturalism”—while appreciating that “a certain naturalization 
of consciousness would require, at the same time, an expansion of our sense of the 
natural”—he is returning to a path of thinking already anticipated and developed 
most fully by Merleau-Ponty. 25 We can see that Merleau-Ponty is on this path as 
early as  La structure du comportement , where he aims to “understand the relations 
of consciousness and nature” by giving naturalism, properly understood and 
“transposed,” its due place  within  transcendental philosophy, and thereby to “de ﬁ ne 
transcendental philosophy anew in such a way as to integrate it with the very 
phenomenon of the real.” 26 And his  ﬁ nal writings, in their pursuit of the “Becoming-
nature of man which is the becoming-man of nature,” are a continuation of this same 
philosophical effort, albeit with transformed concepts and strategies. 27 
 What distinguishes Merleau-Ponty’s account of our inherence in nature from the 
naturalist’s approach is that the former takes seriously the problem of thinking 
nature from within. The causal account of the world proposed by traditional naturalism 
 23  See, for example,  Ideen II/Ideas II , §62. 
 24  Merleau-Ponty,  Signes  (Paris: Gallimard, 1960), 166;  Signs , trans. Richard McCleary (Evanston: 
Northwestern, 1964), 210. Hereafter, cited textually as S, with French preceding English pagination.  
 25  David Wood, “What is Eco-Phenomenology?”  Eco-Phenomenology: Back to the Earth Itself , 
eds. Charles Brown and Ted Toadvine (Albany: SUNY Press, 2003), 231, 224. 
 26  Merleau-Ponty,  La structure du comportement (Paris: PUF, 1942), 3, 4, 224;  The Structure of 
Behavior , trans. Alden Fisher (Pittsburgh: Duquesne, 1983), 1, 2, 241. Hereafter cited textually as 
SB with French preceding English pagination. 
 27  Merleau-Ponty,  Le visible et l’invisible (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), 239;  The Visible and the Invisible , 
trans. Alphonso Lingis (Evanston: Northwestern, 1968), 185. Hereafter cited textually as VI with 
French preceding English pagination. As I hope the foregoing makes clear, I do not see Merleau-Ponty’s 
response to naturalism as  ﬁ tting neatly into either the mundane or the transcendental approaches 
sketched by Embree, op. cit., 484.  
372
T. Toadvine
excludes the perspective and position of the one offering the account, who stands 
above this causal world to survey it from a station that is simultaneously everywhere 
and nowhere. Rejecting this disembodied panorama for tacitly af ﬁ rming what it 
openly denies, Merleau-Ponty proposes an account of philosophical re ﬂ ection as 
emergent from the nature on which it re ﬂ ects, developing this account across each 
of his major works and in a progressively more sophisticated fashion. If philosophical 
re ﬂ ection is to emerge from nature, it can only do so literally as a re- ﬂ exion, a folding 
of the sensible onto itself. In other words, philosophical thought is, like all thought, 
an intensi ﬁ cation or redoubling by which nature meets up with itself as an iterative 
fold of natural sense. In  La structure du comportement , this iterative fold of nature 
is presented as the “structure of structures,” an all-encompassing Gestalt by which 
human subjectivity gains access to objectivity and one sole universe, beyond the 
interest-bound environments of other organisms. In  Phénoménologie de la percep-
tion , nature’s intensi ﬁ cation takes the form of a “re ﬂ ection on the unre ﬂ ective,” a 
radical or second-order re ﬂ ection that takes into account its relation, as re ﬂ ection, 
with the situation that precedes and conditions it. And in his  ﬁ nal working notes, 
Merleau-Ponty characterizes philosophy as a “chiasm of chiasms,” a doubled reversal 
by which the self-interrogation of Being, as the encroachment of the sensible and 
the intelligible, becomes explicit as a question. 
 At stake in this series of recursive  ﬁ gures is the effort to think philosophy 
immanently, as emergent from nature. But what comes progressively to the fore for 
Merleau-Ponty is that an ineliminable gap between philosophical re ﬂ ection and 
nature is constitutive of both. Since re ﬂ ection can never equal the pre-re ﬂ ective 
moment from which it emerges, this moment haunts re ﬂ ection as an immemorial 
and constitutive silence. Insofar as philosophy is incapable of thematizing its own 
emergence, insofar as it remains conditioned by a nature that escapes its re ﬂ ective 
recuperation, nature is disclosed indirectly as a silent resistance internal to philosophy’s 
own movement. Nature in this deepest, archi-factical sense remains invisible to 
naturalism insofar as the latter adopts a position external to the world on which it 
re ﬂ ects. But this immemorial sense of nature also transforms the method of phenom-
enology, since it requires a recognition of what can appear only in its withdrawal, 
only by keeping silent. The genuine homology of philosophy and nature is disclosed 
only at the level of this withdrawal. To see why this is so, we begin by retracing 
Merleau-Ponty’s efforts to understand philosophical re ﬂ ection from within as the 
recursive doubling of structure, re ﬂ ection, and chiasm. 
 Nature as Immemorial Past 
 The structure of “mind” that characterizes the human order in Merleau-Ponty’s  La 
structure du comportement is the highest and most complex of the Gestalts that 
compose reality, incorporating within itself the lower-order Gestalts of matter and 
life and, in so doing, conserving and integrating them while eliminating them as 
independent moments (SB 224/208). What Merleau-Ponty  ﬁ nds philosophically 
373
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
compelling about the concept of Gestalt, as the irreducibly basic element of his 
ontology, is that it reveals “intelligibility in the nascent state,” the autochthonous 
emergence of an idea within a material con ﬁ guration from which it remain insepa-
rable (SB 223/206-7). In other words, already at the level of matter, we start not with 
the pure thing but with a con ﬁ guration that is inherently holistic, relational, and 
meaningful, and as this con ﬁ guration develops new levels of complexity, it passes 
through percolation points at which new qualities and meaningful relations obtain. 
Life is such a new level corresponding to the formation of a mutually constitutive 
relation between an organism and its environment. And mind, characterized by 
symbolic behavior, is the highest such level, responsible for the human ability to 
bracket our vital norms, engage in creative and virtual acts, and comport ourselves 
toward one true and objective world shared by all. 
 Now, the achievement of symbolic behavior through the integration of matter and 
life into a more complex structure is, on the one hand, simply the continuation of a 
single process that conserves and recon ﬁ gures. Yet it is distinct from the earlier 
re-con ﬁ gurations of structure, such as the transition from matter into life, in that it is 
recursive or self-referential. More precisely, the symbolic level is achieved when a 
Gestalt takes as its theme the structure of other Gestalts, when it takes up the transpos-
able relations between structures to achieve a virtual or second-order con ﬁ guration. 
Merleau-Ponty illustrates this second-order Gestalt with the example of playing a 
musical instrument, which involves transposing a single melody from its written form 
on the score, to a series of kinaesthetic movements, to a pattern on the keyboard, to an 
audible distribution of notes. Through these transpositions, the very structure, the 
musical essence, of the melody animates entirely different bodies. It is this capacity to 
extract such essences, the structures of structures, and to transpose them into different 
expressive forms that de ﬁ nes symbolic behavior, for Merleau-Ponty. 
 If symbolic behavior is a kind of melody in its own right, then it is a melody that 
sings the distilled essence of other melodies in a recursively nested structure. 
This recursive melody opens us onto the virtual, since it allows us to transpose structures 
in unlimited ways: to locate ourselves on a map, or to create tools with open-ended 
uses, or to spontaneously improvise on a musical instrument. In short, while the 
melody of the non-human organism is constrained by the norms of its species, the 
human is de ﬁ ned by its capacity “of going beyond created structures in order to create 
others” (SB 189/175). It is this ability to break with the constraints of our organic 
norms that allows us to treat our own bodies as one thing among many, to adopt a 
disinterested perspective, and therefore to describe the universe in objective terms. In short, 
truth is made possible by the recursivity of structures, by the transposability of the ideas 
that they embody. Re ﬂ ection is thus, for the Merleau-Ponty of  La Structure , the iterative 
intensi ﬁ cation of nature as a complex of Gestalts. 
 Merleau-Ponty presents this shift into the symbolic as a further stage in the 
integration of the forms that constitute reality. Just as life introduces a level of 
structural complexity that incorporates physical matter while going beyond it, so 
does symbolic thought integrate within itself both matter and life. Nature, therefore, 
consists of a hierarchy of nested Gestalts of ever-increasing complexity, and we 
can conceive of this complex structure as a symphony of nested melodies. Symbolic 
374
T. Toadvine
thought, as a recursive melody of melodies, is the perspective from which this 
symphony is comprehended. Yet as elegant as this system may seem, it leaves us 
with two dif ﬁ culties: First, part of what attracts Merleau-Ponty to the Gestalt is that 
it is irreducible to physical components. A Gestalt is not a thing but rather a meaningful 
form, that is, a perceived reality, so that Merleau-Ponty’s account of nature as a 
hierarchy of nested Gestalts has an ambiguous ontological status. On the one hand, 
this is exactly the point that Merleau-Ponty wishes to press against naturalism, 
including the naturalistic biases of the Gestalt theorists themselves, who in the end 
always try to translate the higher levels of structure into physicalist terms. 
 But, on the other hand, what does it mean to describe the fundamental elements 
of reality as “perceptual?” Does it mean that they are ultimately correlates of 
subjectivity, so that nature is ultimately to be re-interpreted as “consciousness of” 
nature? Certain of Merleau-Ponty’s formulations in  La structure du comportement 
point in precisely this direction. 28 As Renaud Barbaras compellingly argues, it is 
only in Merleau-Ponty’s later work that he is willing to embrace the possibility that 
being is fundamentally perceptual without reference to a subject that would perceive 
it. 29 To the extent that our symphony of melodies is ultimately the noema of some 
subjective intending, then Gestalts would not provide nature’s ultimate ontological 
foundation. But if we embrace the perceptual quality of being without a subject, 
then subjectivity can be an emergent property of the symphony itself, just as 
Merleau-Ponty’s account of symbolic thought as recursive structure suggests. 
 But the second dif ﬁ culty concerns the integration of matter and life into mind, 
which would still treat mind, albeit an emergent and immanent mind, as the  telos of 
nature’s development. What we need to remember concerning this integration of 
Gestalts is that it is an historical process. When physical matter takes on the new 
structure that transforms it into a living body, the physical matter, even though 
integrated into a more complex whole, retains its historical density and inertia. 
This means that every integration is partial and fragile, obtaining only in degrees 
and constantly subject to fragmentation. As Merleau-Ponty admits, “There is always 
a duality which reappears at one level or another,” since “integration is never absolute 
and it always fails” (SB 226/210). In other words, while Merleau-Ponty will claim 
that the human being integrates its own biological life into a higher and more complex 
unity, so that, in his words, “‘life’ does not have the same meaning in animality and 
humanity” (SB 188/174), and furthermore, that “Man can never be an animal: his 
life is always more or less integrated than that of an animal” (SB 196/181), it remains 
the case that our biological life can and does assert its own autonomous rights. 
 Since integration is an historical process, our more-or-less composed human 
selves carry with them, in kernel, the sedimented stages through which we have 
passed, so that, even to the extent that we do sublimate our animal natures, we never 
leave them behind. More generally, this inertia and historical density of incorporated 
 28  As when he writes that “what we call nature is already consciousness of nature, what we call life 
is already consciousness of life and what we call mental is still an object vis-à-vis consciousness” 
(SB 199/184). 
 29  Renaud Barbaras, “Merleau-Ponty and Nature,”  Research in Phenomenology 31 (2001): 37. 
375
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
structures, insofar as they limit the recursivity of mind, is for Merleau-Ponty the 
truth of naturalism: “it is not a question of an inherence in material apparatuses, 
which as a matter of fact can be only  objects for consciousness, but of a presence to 
consciousness of its proper history and of the dialectical stages which it has 
traversed” (SB 224–25/208). 
 We can illustrate this by returning to the  ﬁ gure of melody. If the melody of life 
integrates the melody of matter, and mind consists of recursive relations between 
such melodies, then at every stage of integration, there is a condensation of the entire 
history of lines of song into denser phrasings. This follows from Merleau-Ponty’s 
recognition that physical Gestalts bear within themselves a reference to the entire 
history of the universe as their emergent condition, while, at the vital level, the 
contrapuntal melody of every organism folds into itself, as an organic memory, its 
entire evolutionary history. Every phrase and every note of each organic melody is 
therefore rich with the micromelodies of this accumulated history, an immemorial 
past that could never be entirely unpacked. Think of the phrase of a melody as having 
a structure like Mandelbrot’s fractal coastline, such that, as you zoom in closer, you 
 ﬁ nd the same degree of intricately enfolded structure at every scale. 
 Furthermore, since each integration and transposition is only partial, the synthesis 
by which the past is folded into the present will always be selective and creative, that 
is, expressive: it will simplify along one dimension, creatively improvise along 
another, and leave remainders throughout. So, the fact that integration always fails at 
one point or another is just the obverse of the fact that this symphony of Gestalts is 
incessantly recreating its past as well as itself, carrying along its immemorial history 
while constantly recomposing it. And it is precisely within this ongoing folding of 
the entire history of nature’s symphony into the very next line of every behavioral 
melody—and the iterative turn by which one melody tries to re ﬂ ect on this process 
of becoming as such—that we can locate the moment of nature’s self-concealment. 
Nature’s secret withdrawal is precisely the immemorial past enfolded within the 
intervals and silences of its interwoven melodic lines. 30  
 Nature as Archi-Factical Resistance 
 Merleau-Ponty already recognizes, at the end of  La structure du comportement , that it 
would be necessary to take the historical density of Gestalts more seriously, particu-
larly with respect to re ﬂ ection’s own identity as a recursive Gestalt. Ultimately, the 
problem that confronts this ontology of Gestalts is that its construction is carried out 
from a point of view external to it, from the perspective, as Merleau-Ponty himself 
says, of an “outside spectator” (SB 175/162). By describing re ﬂ ection as itself a Gestalt, 
so that we are, ultimately, Gestalts thinking Gestalts, Merleau-Ponty takes us a long 
 30  I expand on Merleau-Ponty’s musical ontology of nature in “ Musica Universalis and the Memory 
of Nature,” forthcoming in  MonoKL .  
376
T. Toadvine
way toward reinstating re ﬂ ection within the nature from which it emerges. But in so 
doing, he also calls attention to the blind spot of re ﬂ ection with respect to its own 
emergence, the problem in principle of thinking nature from within it. When 
Merleau-Ponty returns to this problem in  Phénoménologie de la perception , it is posed 
in terms of re ﬂ ection’s relationship with the unre ﬂ ective. On the one hand, re ﬂ ection 
does not fail to make contact with the pre-re ﬂ ective moment from which it opens, as 
our very ability to indicate and describe that pre-re ﬂ ective moment attests.  Yet, on the 
other hand, re ﬂ ection never coincides with the pre-re ﬂ ective or presents it transpar-
ently, since it necessarily transforms the structure of the pre-re ﬂ ective in opening it 
to re ﬂ ection. To de ﬁ ne re ﬂ ection properly, Merleau-Ponty argues, we must take this 
entire structure into account; as he puts it, we must “re ﬂ ect on re ﬂ ection” and 
thereby “understand the natural situation which it is conscious of succeeding and 
which is therefore part of its de ﬁ nition.” 31 What Merleau-Ponty calls “second-order” 
or “radical” re ﬂ ection in  Phénoménologie de la perception and “hyper-re ﬂ ection” in 
 Le Visible et l’invisible is this effort of re ﬂ ection to account for its own foundation 
in a nature from which it emerges but that remains for it an unthematizeable past, a 
past that “has never been a present” (PP 280/282). This immemorial past appears 
within our experience as the resistance that the unre ﬂ ective offers to re ﬂ ection, as 
the remainder that resists thematization even as it conditions re ﬂ ection and makes 
it possible. 
 It is our very inherence within nature, the fact that we can only open onto it from 
a situation within it, and that we can never fully thematize our own emergence from 
it, that necessitates this immemorial remainder. In other words, nature in its primordial 
autonomy appears precisely as the resistance that the unre ﬂ ective offers to re ﬂ ection. 
A phenomenology of re ﬂ ection thus rediscovers the ancient truth that nature loves 
to hide, but now in such a way that the hidden depths of its withdrawal constitute 
the very act of philosophy from within. I take it that Merleau-Ponty was aiming to 
disclose this sense of nature, which strains the very limits of phenomenology, when 
he calls for phenomenology to become a means of “unveiling a back side of things 
that we have not constituted,” since “What resists phenomenology within us—natural 
being, the ‘barbarous’ source Schelling spoke of—cannot remain outside pheno-
menology and should have its place within it” (S 227/180, 225/178). 
 We have seen that, in  La Structure du comportement , re ﬂ ection was posed as the 
“structure of structures,” while, in  Phénoménologie de la perception , it becomes 
“re ﬂ ection on re ﬂ ection,” and, in each version, the effort of thought to grasp its 
debt to its own unthinkable origins is at stake. Nature’s resistance and autonomy 
appears here as the archi-factical withdrawal around which re ﬂ ection secretes 
itself. As  Merleau-Ponty’s work develops, and as he increasingly appreciates 
nature’s resistance to re ﬂ ection, the language of re ﬂ ection as a “structure of structures” 
vanishes. As we have seen, this is  ﬁ rst replaced by another iterative structure, that 
of second-order re ﬂ ection. But as Merleau-Ponty comes to understand re ﬂ ection as 
 31  Merleau-Ponty,  Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1945), 75;  Phenomenology 
of Perception , trans. Colin Smith (London: Routledge Classics, 2002), 72. Hereafter cited textually 
as PP with French preceding English pagination. 
377
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
modeled on the reversibility of the body, on the touching-touched relation, radical 
re ﬂ ection is gradually displaced by the  ﬁ gure of chiasm. 32 Merleau-Ponty’s use of 
this term plays on both its rhetorical and its physiological senses.  In English, the 
term  chiasm is a shortened form of two words with apparently distinct meanings, 
one biological ( chiasma , and the same in French,  chiasma with an “a”) and one 
rhetorical ( chiasmus in English,  chiasme  with an “e” in French). Within physiology, 
a  chiasma [ chiasma ] is the point where anatomical structures, such as nerves or 
ligaments, cross—where they form an X, a  chi . A paradigmatic example would be 
the optic chiasma, where the  ﬁ bers of the optic nerves cross at the base of the brain, 
which has long been thought to play a major role in synthesizing monocular images 
into stereoscopic vision. In rhetoric, on the other hand, a  chiasmus [ chiasme ] is a 
 ﬁ gure of speech formed by a repetition of structure in reverse order: “Beauty is 
truth, truth beauty” (as Keats says). If the two phrases are placed on two lines and 
the parallel elements connected,  ﬁ rst to fourth and second to third, the X of the  chi 
is formed. Merleau-Ponty’s use of the concept intentionally borrows from both of 
these meanings, joining together the reversal and circularity of the chiasmus (“there 
is a body of the mind and a mind of the body and a chiasmus [ chiasme ] between 
them,” [VI 313/259]) as well as the unity-in-difference of the chiasma (“like the 
chiasma [ chiasma ] of the eyes, this one is also what makes us belong to the same 
world” [VI 268/215]). 
 Such chiastic structures come to replace Gestalt wholes for Merleau-Ponty as the 
fundamental ontological reality, so that now, rather than a hierarchy of nested 
Gestalts, as we saw in  La Structure du comportement , Merleau-Ponty’s last writings 
propose to us that the world is fundamentally a nested structure of chiasms. In the 
words of Renaud Barbaras, “It is necessary…to picture the universe as intuited by 
Merleau-Ponty as a proliferation of chiasms that integrate themselves according to 
different levels of generality.” 33 The structure of the chiasm also serves as a new 
 ﬁ gure for re ﬂ ection. Philosophical questions, Merleau-Ponty tells us, are those 
wherein the questioner is “implicated by the question” (VI 47/27), so that philo-
sophical questions manifest a sort of “diplopia”:
 [A]t the same time that they aim at a state of things, they aim at themselves as questions, the 
same time that they aim at the signi ﬁ cation ‘being,’ they aim at the being of signi ﬁ cation 
and the place of signi ﬁ cation within Being. It is characteristic of the philosophical questioning 
that it return upon itself, that it ask itself also what to question is and what to respond is. Once 
this question to the second power is raised, it cannot be effaced. (VI 160/119–20) 
 Merleau-Ponty’s use of chiastic rhetorical structure here already alludes to the fact 
that philosophy will be, for him, a chiasm. The chiasm of philosophical questioning 
has its ontological basis in the self-differentiation of  ﬂ esh. In  Le Visible et l’invisible , 
Merleau-Ponty famously described the experience of one hand touching another as 
 32  I expand on the following description of Merleau-Ponty’s use of “chiasm” in “The Chiasm,” in 
 Routledge Companion to Phenomenology , ed. Sebastian Luft and Søren Overgaard, 336–47 
(London: Routledge, 2011). 
 33  Renaud Barbaras,  The Being of the Phenomenon , trans. Ted Toadvine and Leonard Lawlor 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004), 307. 
378
T. Toadvine
the primordial event of re ﬂ ection. The auto-affective self-differentiation of the body 
demonstrates a “sort of re ﬂ ection” (S 210/166) that is paradigmatic of self-re ﬂ ection 
in other registers, as in the self-experience of thought. But the body’s self-re ﬂ ection is 
only an exemplary or intensi ﬁ ed version of a kind of re ﬂ ection already at work within 
every being, in its folding or doubling into an outside (its visible or sensible aspect) 
and an inside (its invisible or intelligible aspect). Merleau-Ponty’s term for this 
fundamental ontological self-differentiation is “interrogation,” i.e., questioning. 
The philosophical act of questioning is therefore the culmination of an operation of 
questioning that underlies and expresses itself through every chiasmic structure. 
The self-questioning of the philosopher is therefore “borne by an infrastructure of 
being” (VI 160/120). It follows that the various nested levels of the chiasm are mani-
festations of Being’s self-questioning. Philosophy makes the self-questioning of Being 
explicit as a question; it is an interrogation of being about the being of interrogation. 
This iteration of the chiastic structure therefore becomes Merleau-Ponty’s new 
de ﬁ nition of philosophical thinking, which he calls in his working notes a “chiasm  of 
chiasms [ chiasme des chiasmes ].” 34  
 Now, it is signi ﬁ cant that, for every chiasm, there is a turning point or hinge that 
remains, within the terms opened by that chiasm, invisible or archi-factical. I borrow 
this term “archi-factical” from Jacob Rogozinski, who uses it to characterize the 
“remainder” that always escapes in the body’s auto-affection, that is, in the inevitable 
slippage between the touching and the touched. 35 It is well-known that, in 
Merleau-Ponty’s famous descriptions of one hand touching the other, the coincidence 
of the two hands is “always immanent and never realized in fact” (VI 194/147). The 
remainder left behind from this non-coincidence, as Rogozinski points out, is “untouchable 
for my touch, but also invisible for my vision, inaudible for my hearing; we will never 
meet up with it in the world, as one element among others in our daily experience;” 
nevertheless, it is revealed indirectly by intraworldly phenomena that are not to be 
confused with it (Rogozinski, 238). The remainder that the effort to touch ourselves 
touching always misses is “archi-factical” in the sense that it conditions the very 
possibility of touch itself even while remaining absent from the world of touch. 
 While Rogozinski is only concerned with the remainder of corporeal auto-affection, 
we know from Merleau-Ponty that the body’s self-touching is only one salient example 
of an ontologically ubiquitous chiasm, that of the body with the world, or of humanity 
and nature. This means that when my hand touches an object, there is a “sort of 
re ﬂ ection,” a subtle form of auto-affection, that eventuates in the touch. The thing 
touches me as I touch it; it becomes me as I become it. Yet in the moment that this 
chiasmus crosses over, where self switches into other, there is always a slippage. In the 
case of the body’s self-touching, this slippage gives rise to a remainder or a precipitate, 
as Rogozinski describes. But in the exchange of the body with the world, the slippage 
 34  Emmanuel de Saint Aubert cites several variants of this formulation from Merleau-Ponty’s 
unpublished notes in  Le scénario cartésien (Paris: Vrin, 2005), 164. 
 35  Jacob Rogozinski, “The Chiasm and the Remainder (How does Touching Touch Itself?),” 
 Rethinking Facticity , eds. François Raffoul and Eric Sean Nelson (Albany: SUNY Press, 2008). 
379
22 Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Lifeworldly Naturalism
is a consequence of the body’s situatedness within the world that it touches, that is, the 
fact that it is  of the world. This is what we have above referred to as our inherence in 
the world. But now we are recognizing that this inherence always splits apart from 
within. When the world touches me as I touch it, the two touches can never be reciprocal. 
Nature always has, so to speak, the upper hand. My incapacity to see myself seeing or 
touch myself touching, what Rogozinski calls the remainder, is precisely a consequence 
of the situatedness of my efforts to re ﬂ ect on the nature that encompasses me. 
 I am suggesting that the  écart of the touching-touched, the resistance of the unre ﬂ ective 
to re ﬂ ection, and the slippage in the integration of Gestalts are all variations on nature’s 
withdrawal, its presentation of its own unpresentability. In each case, re ﬂ ection comes 
up against what cannot appear to it directly, what it can only encounter as a resistance at 
the limits of its compass. Such resistance is precisely nature’s indirect, archi-factical 
disclosure of its autonomy. The reason why nature can never simply be the correlate of 
experience is because our experience emerges from within nature and remains condi-
tioned by it. This emergence cannot be thematized as such by the experience that it 
conditions. That the emergence cannot be thematized as such does not mean that it 
leaves no impression on or in experience. But that from which experience emerges can 
become an object of experience only indirectly, only as a withdrawal from or resistance 
to experience. What we have called the archi-factical resistance of nature is therefore a 
consequence of experience’s emergence from what it cannot thematize and occupies the 
obverse of what that experience discloses. Here we reach the limit of what phenomeno-
logical description can clarify, the very ground and compass of re ﬂ ection. It is this resistant 
ground that both conditions and makes possible phenomenological re ﬂ ection, and that 
can be disclosed only through phenomenology, that deserves the name “nature” in the 
most fundamental sense. 
 With this deeper sense of nature, phenomenology runs up against a fundamental 
paradox, namely, that the very task of re ﬂ ecting on and describing nature harbors within 
it a resistance that cannot be directly thematized and that would itself be nature in the 
most primordial sense. 36 But the fundamental paradox of a phenomenology of nature 
does not render phenomenology mute or bring it to a close. The paradox is not 
something that phenomenology must overcome or get beyond, since it is constitutive of 
our very experience of nature. It does however, require us to reconsider our everyday 
understanding of what it means to be a “part of” nature and to be estranged from it. If our 
descriptions are correct, then we can never be a “part of” nature in the sense of one thing 
among many in an assemblage that collects them all. The nature in which we are involved 
and inhere is not a collection of determinate things but a horizon that we open onto from 
within and that we  ﬁ nd ourselves already having emerged from. To experience a world 
is precisely to open onto it from within in this way. But to open onto nature from within 
is also necessarily to be estranged from it and from ourselves, insofar as our own 
 36  I have developed this line of thinking more fully in “The Fundamental Paradox of a Phenomenology 
of Nature,” in  Ontology of Nature: Continental Readings of Nature , ed. Gerard Kuperus and Marjolein 
Oele (Berlin: Springer, forthcoming). See also my “Ecophenomenology and the Resistance of 
Nature,”  Advancing Phenomenology: Essays in Honor of Lester Embree , eds. Philip Blosser and 
Thomas Nenon, 343–55 (Dordrecht: Springer, 2010). 
380
T. Toadvine
emergence is a blind spot that we can never  ﬁ ll. This blind spot is the remainder that 
always slips in between our re ﬂ ection and the situation on which we re ﬂ ect. 
 Consequently, our estrangement from nature is already implied by our situatedness 
within it, by the partiality and temporality of our embodiment. Because of this essential 
estrangement, the goal of becoming one with nature, of coinciding with it in an 
antelapsarian unity, is misguided. 37  On the other hand, since the  ﬁ ssion of our bodies 
into re ﬂ ecting and re ﬂ ected on, into subject and object, is itself a  ﬁ ssion  of nature , we 
might say that our estrangement, our ontological lateness, is in fact the way that we 
coincide with nature, as an intensi ﬁ cation through us of its own effort of coming-to-self. 38 
This would be another way of interpreting Cézanne’s famous remark that “the landscape 
thinks itself in me … and I am its consciousness.” 39  
 37  This essential estrangement is not, however, without its own ethical implications, even though 
I do not attempt to unpack them here. 
 38  As Merleau-Ponty suggests in some late writings, such as his remarks in the lectures on nature 
concerning re ﬂ ection as the  Selbstung of Being. See  La Nature (Paris: Seuil, 1995), 335, 340; 
 Nature , trans. Robert Vallier (Evanston: Northwestern, 2003), 268, 273. 
 39  Cited in Merleau-Ponty, “Le doute de Cézanne,”  Signes , 23; “Cézanne’s Doubt,” in  The Merleau-
Ponty Reader , ed. Ted Toadvine and Leonard Lawlor (Evanston: Northwestern, 2007), 77. 
 Part III 
 After World War II  
383
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_23, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Ideen I and French Phenomenology 
 Experiential -Descriptive and Hermeneutical Phenomenology: 
Ricoeur’s Courageous But Ambiguous Gesture 
 The  ﬁ rst book of the  Ideen was translated into French by Paul Ricœur in a prison 
camp during World War II and published soon after (1950). It contains many fruitful 
interpretative footnotes by the translator, which were initially marginal comments 
he wrote in the German copy while carefully studying the text. In addition, this 
translation includes an important introduction by Ricœur, which is both “internal” 
and “genetic”: “The goal of this introduction is, therefore, quite modest. There is 
 ﬁ rst the question of drawing together several themes issuing from the internal exam-
ination of  Ideas I developed in our commentary, then there is the matter of outlining 
the history of Husserl’s thought from the  Logische Untersuchungen to the  Ideen 
with the aid of the most important manuscripts from the period 1901–11.” 1 
 Ricœur considers Husserl’s text an allusive text, full of “holes,” the meaning of 
which is “hidden” or outside itself. Such an observation indicates that he is looking 
 Chapter 23 
 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology 
 Natalie  Depraz   
 N.  Depraz (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  University of Rouen ,  Rouen ,  France   
 Husserl-Archives ,  Paris ,  France 
e-mail:  natalie.depraz@freesurf.fr 
 For more details see N. Depraz,  Plus sur Husserl. Une phénoménologieexpérientielle (Paris: 
Atlande, 2009), 122–131. 
 1  E. Husserl,  Idées directrices pour une phénoménologie (I) (Paris: Gallimard, coll. Tel, 1950); 
French trans. P. Ricœur, translator’s Introduction, p. XII; English translation, Edmund Husserl, 
 Ideas pertaining to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book, trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1983). Translation of Ricoeur’s Introduction in Paul Ricoeur,  Husserl: An 
Analysis of his Phenomenology , trans. Edward G. Ballard and Lester E. Embree (Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press, 1967), 13, hereafter cited as “ET.” 
384
N. Depraz
for information, contents of knowledge, whereas he says himself that the core is not 
there, but in the ability “to impart a new vision of the world and of consciousness, 
rather than to say something de ﬁ nitive about the world and about consciousness, 
something which perhaps could not be understood without the acquisition of this 
new vision.” 2 Ricœur therefore hesitates between his interest in the historical recep-
tion of phenomenology as transcendental idealism (together with the room for logic 
and the status of essence in the  ﬁ rst part 3 ) and naïve general questions related to the 
very meaning of the phenomenological reduction: “What is reduction? What is 
constitution? … These things cannot be directly told but must be achieved by the 
spiritual discipline [ l’ascèse ] of the phenomenological method. Also it is dif ﬁ cult to 
say at what point within  Ideen I one is actually using the famous phenomenological 
reduction, a fact which is quite disconcerting to the reader.” 4 In fact, the phenomena 
are each time re-read through their historical objectivity, never re-invested from 
their inner lived singular quality, from our ability to re-do the particular experience 
and to check their validity. When an experiential dimension comes to the fore, 
it reveals itself through a religious vocabulary (“ mouvement spirituel ,” “ ascèse ,” 
“ conversion ”), which only “dresses,” i.e., recovers or even hides, the phenomenon. 
 In favor of the reading by Ricœur, however, who publishes a book the same year, 
1950, that deals with such a non-hermeneutical claim of descriptive psychology, 5 it 
must be said that he sometimes lets experiential indications emerge, namely these 
moments when he brilliantly writes in the  ﬁ rst person: “… I believe Husserl would 
be understood if one could understand that the constitution of the world is not a 
formal legislation but the very giving of seeing by the transcendental subject.” 6 He 
goes so far as to produce himself such a putting to work of the reduction, which he 
then calls “existential,” while inviting the reader to do it him or herself:
 I think that each of us is invited to discover in himself this act of transcendence. Thus, 
I will risk an outline of the “existential” sense of the thesis of the world. Initially I am lost 
and forgotten in the world, lost in the things, lost in the ideas, lost in the plants and 
animals, lost in others, lost in mathematics. Presence (which can never be disavowed) is 
the occasion of temptation; in seeing there is a trap, the trap of my alienation; there I am 
external, diverted. Now it is evident how naturalism is the lowest stage of the natural atti-
tude, the level that leads to its re-engagement. For if I lose myself in the world, I am then 
ready to treat myself as a thing of the world. The thesis of the world is a sort of blindness 
in the very heart of seeing. What I call living is hiding myself as naïve consciousness 
within the existence of all things. 7    
 2  Op. cit., p. XIII; ET, p. 14. 
 3  “Let us set this complex relationship of logic and phenomenology aside for the moment, since the 
third part of this introduction will be devoted to the historical problem of the passage from the 
 Logical Investigations to the  Ideas ” (xv; ET, p. 16). Cf. “III. Naissance des  Ideen ,” xxxi–xxxix; ET, 
28–34. 
 4  Op. cit., x; ET, 16. 
 5  P. Ricœur , Philosophie de la volonté , t. 1: Le volontaire et l’involontaire (Paris: Seuil, 1950). 
 6  xix; ET, 19 
 7  xx; ET, 20. 
385
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
 Ricœur’s thrust is here full of “vaillance,” all the more than we know that he will 
set aside later such a direct contact with the vivid quality of inner concrete existential 
meaning  in statu nascendi because of its intrinsic philosophical impossibility, and 
will choose a hermeneutical turning point, namely in  La métaphore vive , 8 and then 
in his “Essais d’herméneutique” entitled  Du texte à l’action . 9 Such an existential 
courage requires in turn a critical examination: in the same way as the religious 
dressing may produce misunderstandings, an existential contention is naïve—therefore 
lyrical: sentimental, “psychic”—as is the private testimony. Of course, Ricœur is 
not blind to such a possibility in 1950: many psycho-phenomenological descriptions 
of the attentional, emotional, and habitual lived experiences unfolded in  Le volon-
taire et l’involontaire attest to it; he also mentions the virtue of the “the psychological 
method of initiating,” 10 but immediately relativizes it while indicating how much 
logic has trouble “grafting on” to it (“ s’y ‘greffe’ mal ”). 
 So Ricœur’s reading is already mainly hermeneutical: if some phenomenological 
“exercises” are identi ﬁ ed (in the third part), they are immediately limited in their 
scope and with regard to the time-thematic, which will be dealt with later, in the 
Bernau Manuscripts (1917–1918); or with regard to the I-problem, which remains 
“undecided” (“ indécis ”) and less radically identi ﬁ ed than in the  Logische 
Untersuchungen ; or, again, with regard to the relationship to the object, which the 
fourth part deals with while emphasizing the tension at work between the meaning 
of the object for me and its ontic reality independently of my aiming at it, as well as 
its problematic teleological regulation. 
 The Main French Critics of Phenomenology 
as Transcendental Idealism 
 In contrast with Ricœur’s early original (though ambiguous) contention, but in 
accordance with his later critical stance, some major post-Husserlian phenom-
enologists share the identi ﬁ cation of Husserl’s turning point to transcendental ide-
alism in  Ideen I with a return to a subjectivist metaphysics. Needless to say, such 
a critique of a residual metaphysics within phenomenology will lead the whole 
set of critical arguments against the text of 1913 and will nourish alternative 
phenomenological possibilities, either toward the conquest of a new ontology 
(Merleau-Ponty, Sartre) or toward a radical renewal of ethics (Levinas, Derrida). 
In short, the critical reaction against transcendental phenomenological idealism 
 qua  metaphysics is led by the promotion of an existential phenomenology in the 
broad sense of the word. 
 8  P. Ricœur,  La métaphor vive , Paris, Le Seuil, 1975. 
 9  P. Ricœur,  Du texte à l’action , Essais d’herméneutique II (Paris: Le Seuil, 1968). 
 10  P. XXI, XXXI; ET, 21. 
386
N. Depraz
 The quest for a renewed ontology leads Sartre and Merleau-Ponty to refuse 
(in general accord with Heidegger) the formal structure of intentionality and the 
subjectivist stance of egology. The former proceeds backwards from  Ideen I to the 
 Logische Untersuchungen in order to uncover a non-egological phenomenology, 
whereas the latter, who had read Gabriel Marcel, will eagerly read  Ideen II in order 
to discover the embodied subject he could not  ﬁ nd in the  ﬁ rst book of the  Ideen. 
Both therefore produce a shifting from a transcendental phenomenology (associated 
with idealism and metaphysics) to an ontological one. 
 Sartre’s ontophenomenology creates a dissociation in Husserl’s contention between 
the method of intentionality, which is kept, and the theory of the ego, which is rejected 
as a useless hypothesis; as for Merleau-Ponty, he will deepen Husserl’s theory of 
kinesthetic perception while endowing it with an originary  ﬂ eshly embodiment, so as 
to unfold what he calls an ontology of  ﬂ esh. 
 The transition from phenomenology to ethics corresponds to a change of meth-
odological interest from intentionality to the very reduction. The criticisms therefore 
do not concern the subject (too psychological or egological) any longer, but rather 
the primacy given to the object and to objectivation. In order to undo such a 
tendency to objectifying theorization, Levinas and Derrida suggest different ways 
of radicalizing the reduction, either as an absolute alterity opposed to any form of 
objectivity or as a de-construction of theory. On the one hand, Levinas tends to 
consider the principle of intuition ( Ideen I , §24) as something fruitful for the 
concreteness of the truth as lived experience in his  Théorie de l’intuition dans la 
phénoménologie de Husserl  (1930), but in the 1960s, namely, in  Totalité et in ﬁ ni 
(1968), he sees in phenomenology as a transcendental idealism a “theoretically 
objectifying” turning point. 
 On the other hand, Derrida is clearly indebted to Husserl’s genetic phenomenol-
ogy, for example in “Genèse et structure” in  L’écriture et la difference (1967) and in 
 Le problème de la genèse dans la phénoménologie de Husserl (1990). He therefore 
sees in  Ideen I the eminent structural place for analyses oriented by the thread of 
static constitution, in contrast (but also in complementarity) with the analyses 
devoted to passive genesis, which are to be found in the passive synthesis manu-
scripts of the 1920s. Derrida’s reading of the Husserl of  Ideen I is therefore less 
critical than limited: the methodology unfolds in distinctive phases, static and 
genetic, with complementary results. 
 Current French Readings Dissociating Idealism, 
Transcendentality, and Metaphysics Within Phenomenology 
 The core of the most contemporary ongoing French research concerning  Ideen 
I  deals with the relevance of its phenomenological stance as a rigorous methodological 
387
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
transcendental stance, thus freeing it from any uncontrolled speculative metaphys-
ics. Such a recent interpretative French step does not come from nowhere: it is 
prepared by a bundle of readings, either German or American in the in the 1960s 
and 1970s 11 or in the 1980s and 1990s, 12 that focus on the way from descriptive 
phenomenological psychology (1901) to transcendental phenomenological ideal-
ism (1913), with a special stress on the reductive method, the process of constitu-
tion, the status of the “I,” the noema, the intentional stance and the empirist/realist 
component of experience, along with comparatives perspectives coming from ana-
lytical philosophy (Frege, Quine, Perry, Shoemaker, Wittgenstein). 
 One of the major French voices in this framework is Jean-François Lavigne’s 
thorough interpretation of this Husserlian decade. 13 Lavigne’s thrust lies in a metic-
ulous genealogical exploration of the transcendantal idealistic stance in Husserl’s 
phenomenology, thus showing how the latter very early (as early as 1901) identi ﬁ ed 
itself as idealism and consequently dissociating phenomenological idealism from its 
transcendental turning point in 1913. Furthermore, Lavigne’s interest goes to the 
method of the reduction as the crucial operation that paves the way to the transcendantal 
dimension of phenomenology. 14 This is also Depraz’s contention in a recent step by 
step reading of Husserl’s  Ideen I , where the focus is less historical-genealogical than 
practical-experiential: the hypothesis is to unveil the operativity of the reductive 
method as an effective exercise and, furthermore, of every act of consciousness or 
lived experience in order to show how much phenomenology is a scienti ﬁ c doing, an 
experiential praxis. The goal is to underline the deep epistemological meaning of 
Husserl’s transcendantal stance. 15  
 Both interpretations share a concern for rehabilitating the validity of  Ideen I as a 
rigorous and coherent phenomenology, either as a methodological transcendental 
idealism or as a methodic epistemological experiential praxis. 
 11  I. Kern,  Husserl und Kant (Den Haag, M. Nijhoff, 1964); J. M. Broekman,  Phänomenologie und 
Egologie (Den Haag, M. Nijhoff, 1965); E. Marbach,  Das Problem des Ichs (Den Haag, M. Nijhoff, 
1974); R. Sokolowski,  The Formation of Husserl’s Concept of Constitution (The Hague, M. Nijhoff, 
1964). 
 12  K. Schuhmann & B. Smith, “Against Idealism: J. Daubert vs. Husserl’s  Ideas I ,”  20th Century 
Philosophy , online, 1985; E. Ströker,  Husserls transzendentale Phänomenologie, Frankfurt 
(Klostermann, 1987); J. Drummond & L. Embree,  The Phenomenology of the Noema (Dordrecht, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992). 
 13  J.-F. Lavigne,  Husserl et la naissance de la phénoménologie. La genèse de l’idéalisme transcen-
dantal phénoménologique dans la recherche et l’enseignement de Husserl (1900–1913) (Paris: 
PUF, coll. Epiméthée, 2005). 
 14  See also J.-F. Lavigne,  Accéder au transcendantal ? Réductions phénoménologiques et idéalisme 
transcendantal dans les Idées directrices…I  de Husserl (Paris: Vrin, 2009). 
 15  N. Depraz,  Husserl: lire en phénoménologue les Idées directrices…I (Paris: P.U.F./CNED, 2008); 
 Plus sur Husserl: une phénoménologie expérientielle (Paris: éditions Atlande, 2009). 
388
N. Depraz
 Working Through a Few Exemplary Sections 
 Introduction 
 I wish to suggest here such a different way of reading: not  what Husserl writes, 
but  how he writes it. That is, I am not looking for his concepts, his analysis, his 
argumentation, his thesis, but I am observing how he proceeds in order to create his 
concepts and, furthermore, his way of relating to the concepts he promotes, the 
modalities of his demonstrations, his use of examples and their status, his own 
involvement as a  ﬁ rst person subject (or not) in his analysis. 16 
 Reading differently involves looking differently at Husserl’s writing, that is, 
discovering in it another kind of writing, based on a way of livingly referring to 
concrete acts and experiences, rather than to a formal logic and to a rational a priori 
mode of argumentation. 
 Such a change of attitude toward the text has a consequence upon the potential 
author to be found in every reader: it generates another way of writing; more 
precisely, it gives way to a kind of phenomenological production based on detailed 
speci ﬁ ed individuated examples, which is referred to in a  ﬁ rst person manner and 
which is worked out a great number of times in a repeated way during a long period 
of time in order to obtain an intra-subjective deepening of the example. 17 
 Both requirements (reading and writing differently, both mutually generating 
each other) are the conditions for the possibility of a genuine “ ﬁ rst-person phenom-
enology,” which will not only be generally wished or claimed (often amounting to a 
“ vœu pieux ”), but will be truly  done , that is, concretely achieved. 18 Having set the 
theoretical framework of my investigation, I would like to show now, “ sans attendre ” 
(with no further delay),  how this can be done on the basis of the practical working 
out of a few paragraphs in  Ideen I , given that we  ﬁ nd rich proofs in this text of such 
a “claim” in Husserl himself, furthermore, a few indications of how to do it, even 
though he never achieved such a claim in a systematic way. That is what I aim at 
beginning to do here. I will provide just a few examples of it, here, given the short 
amount of space, of course. 
 16  On this matter, see N. Depraz, “Lire et écrire en phénoménologue: Sartre et l’accès au vécu ‘en 
première personne,’” in:  L’écriture et la lecture: des phénomènes-miroir. L’exemple de Sartre, ed. 
N. Parant et N. Depraz (PURH, forthcoming). 
 17  On this matter, P. Vermersch,  L’entretien d’explicitation (Paris: ESF, 1994 (2008)), and Cl. 
Petitmengin ed.,  Ten Years of Viewing from Within: The Legacy of Francisco Varela ,  Journal of 
Consciousness Studies Imprint Academic, 2009); more speci ﬁ cally, N. Depraz, “The ‘Failing’ of 
Meaning. A few Steps into a First-person Phenomenological Practice,”  op. cit., 90–117. 
 18  N. Depraz, “Husserl and the Idea of a ‘First-person Phenomenology’: Self-givenness, First-person 
Givenness and First-person Method,” (The article was  ﬁ rst presented as a talk in the framework of 
a Conference organized by Dan Zahavi for the 150th Anniversary of Husserl’s death at Copenhagen, 
Institute for Subjectivity Research, October, 9–10, 2009; it is currently submitted to  Phenomenology 
and the Cognitive Sciences ).  
389
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
 A Few Examples of Phenomenological Practice 
 In order to change our way of looking at the Husserlian text, we need to create a  ﬁ rst 
distinction between two modes of discursivity: on the one side, we  ﬁ nd different 
modes of argumentation: the presentation of a concept (for example: the “transcen-
dental epochē” in §31), the working out of a thesis (for example the putting forward 
of intuition, presented as the “principle of principles” in §24), the delivering of a 
doctrine (for example the functional point of view as the point of view of phenome-
nology in §86), or a critical argumentation (for example the dismantling of introspec-
tion as a psychologist view of phenomenology in §79), or again, the exhibition of a 
theoretical framework (the phenomenology of reason in §135). Such a discursive 
mode is typically philosophical in the sense of the unfolding of a rational critical way 
of arguing and explaining; Husserl himself is not adverse to such a way of philoso-
phizing: he clearly puts aside the rational explanation ( Erklärung ) of the causes of a 
phenomenon and favors a descriptive eliciting ( Aufklärung ) of its immanent meaning. 
In contrast with the “doctrine,” a closer look at Husserl’s texts reveals us the “praxis” 
of the doctrine, that is, (1) the procedure of eidetic variation and the extraction of the 
invariant as the phenomenological practice of the mathematician (§25), (2) the natural 
attitude of the human being and her modes of being present to the world in a  ﬁ rst 
person manner (§27), (3) the experience of attention as the exemplary praxis of the 
phenomenological psychologist (§92), (4) the concrete practical ethics of the phe-
nomenologist (§96) and  ﬁ nally (5) the experiential work of the phenomenological 
experimentalist (§108). I will go through each of these practices while reading each of 
the above mentioned paragraph with the suggested new look.  
 The Practice of the Mathematician (§25) 
 “ entrer vitalement dans l’activité ” (“ lebendig vollziehen und auf Grund direkter 
Analyse bestimmen ”) 19  Husserl is interested here in the practice of the scientist 
considered as an experimental researcher. His challenge in this paragraph lies in 
stressing the relevance of the practice of the mathematician rather than that of the 
empirist philosopher. Why? The latter sticks so much to the sensory facts and so 
exclusively de ﬁ nes experience as a sensory experience that it amounts to giving way 
to another metaphysical contention (the taken-for-granted power of facts). On the 
contrary, the researcher in mathematics is trained in a genuine, that is, living practice: 
he proceeds carefully while allowing the emergence of new possibilities, he is not 
immersed in facts but he opens the way for unknown realities which are effective 
possibilities. In that respect, he is the true “positivist” because he relies in a heuristic 
way on the potential inventivity of new phenomena. 20 
 19  Hua III, 45; fr. trans., 81. 
 20  See N. Depraz,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue ,  Idées directrices pour une phenomenology 
I (Paris: CNED/PUF, 2008), 53–54. 
390
N. Depraz
 Let us take a striking example: if you look at the §35 in the text called  Analysen 
zur passiven Synthesis , 21 which describes the  ﬂ ow of lights in the Loretto valley 
during Husserl’s daily walk in the surroundings of Freiburg, you can observe how 
such an example is carefully worked out, it is not a vague hint (like: “Look at this 
brown table!”) and it is not merely illustrating an apriori thesis. However, the 
suggested reiterated going back to the example is not “experiential” in the sense of 
a “self-elicitation” process, which corresponds to a working out through numerous 
intra-individual reiterations where you immerse each time in your own personal 
experience in a renewed way and discover each time new unknown aspects of it. 
Here the reliance on the “empirist” component of experience plays a driving and 
innovating role; in Husserl’s case on the contrary, such an unfolding of the same 
very example in its different variations is directly linked to the opening of possibilities 
inherent in the mathematical  ﬁ ctional level of exploration, which is rich of a creativity 
based on imaginative potentialities. Here is an experimental way, the modality of 
which is imaginary (and not factual), which is very similar to the creative strategy 
in literature (exemplarily in poetry). In such a frame, the empirical experience is a 
mere beginning leading thread, which is reworked step by step and transformed 
through imaginative options, thus  ﬁ nally becoming contingent. 22 
 The “First-Person” Practice of the Natural Human Being (§27): 
Three Main Modes of Self-conscious Being: Presence, Attention, 
Vigilance 
 Let us look now at another kind of practice, the kind each of us performs. At the 
very outset, Husserl indicates that he is not going to talk or write  about the “natural 
attitude” as a theme: he is going to talk while  living such a natural attitude, adopting 
the point of view of the human being as he lives it in the  ﬁ rst person enunciation: “ in 
der Ichrede. ” 23 The whole paragraph is therefore written using the  ﬁ rst personal 
pronoun “I,” thus livingly performing for the reader a genuine experiential discur-
sivity and inviting her to immediately resonate with it. 
 The  ﬁ rst-person description which is produced results quite minimal in the sense 
of trivial: “ Für mich da sind wirkliche Objekte … Ich kann meine Aufmerksamekeit 
wandern lassen von dem eben gesehenen und beachteten Schreibtisch aus durch die 
 21  Hua XI, Fr. trans, 221. 
 22  Cf. my manuscript about attention, Section I, V. B. “Un contrepoint phénoménologique: 
l’exemplarité, une universalité située,” which describes the operativity of the eidetic variation, as 
much as the alternative way suggested by Pierre Vermersch, where the empiricist dimention  a 
contrario is able to create new dimensions ad plays a motor role in the categorical process. See 
P. Vermersch, “Describing the practice of introspection,”  Ten Years of Viewing from Within, op. cit. , 
20–58. 
 23  Hua III, 48. 
391
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
ungesehenen Teile des Zimmers hinter meinem Rücken zur Veranda, in den Garten, 
zu den Kindern in der Laube usw, zu all den Objekten, von denen ich gerade ‘weiß’, 
als da und dort in meiner unmittelbar mitbewußtenUmgebung seiend …  ” 24  This “ ich 
kann ” (“I can”) is here particularly interesting: it is not a formal empty possibility, it 
is my embodied power of moving and acting, it is my freedom to initiate different 
actions, which indicates that I am not trapped while acting in one only possibility. 
The very meaning of a truly embodied action lies in this opening of multifarious 
potentialities. Here action and mathematician activity therefore deeply resonate, due 
to their common emphasis on the free co-possibilities of acting in the world. 
 This sober description offers two different modes of conscious presence to the 
objects of the world 25 : (1) the  ﬁ rst one, which I merely named “presence,” corre-
sponds to my mere presence to the things which are immediately given to myself, 
be they visible (my table) or invisible (my garden, the children playing); (2) the 
second one corresponds to my ability to  change  the direction of my presence to 
these objects, thus producing a  modi ﬁ cation of this mere co-presence. Such a 
light modi ﬁ cation (which I also named after the contemporary scienti ﬁ c research 
in psychology and neurology: “modulation”) 26 is the very meaning of the atten-
tional activity: “ Ich kann meine Aufmerksamkeit wandern lassen … ” (“I can 
let my attention wander…”). I will come back to this key-feature of the natural 
 ﬁ rst-person attitude in the next section ; (3) the third one is developed a bit later 
in this paragraph thanks to the word “vigilance”: “ ich  ﬁ nde mich im wachen 
Bewußtsein, allzeit und ohne es ändern zu können … Unmittelbar stehen Dinge 
als Gebrauchsobjekte da, der ‘Tisch’ mit seinen Büchern, das ‘Trinkglas’, die 
‘Vase’, das ‘Klavier’ usw. ” 27  This third mode of being present is more global, less 
focal than attention, it corresponds to the very entire life of my being consciously 
present to the things in the world: “[ Die Welt ]  ist immerfort fûr mich vorhanden, 
und ich selbst bin ihr Mitglied .” 28  
 24  Hua III, 48–49; English trans., 51: “Along with the ones now perceived, other actual objects are 
there for me…. I can let my attention wander away from the writing table which was just now seen 
and noticed, out through the unseen parts of the room which are behind my back, to the veranda, 
into the garden, to the children in the arbor, etc., to all the Objects I directly ‘know of’ as being 
there and here in the surroundings of which there is also consciousness.” 
 25  N. Depraz,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue, op. cit., 59–61. 
 26  N. Depraz, “Where is the Phenomenology of Attention Husserl intended to Perform: A 
Transcendental-Pragmatic Description,”  Continental Philosophy Review , Special Issue “Attention 
Between Theory and Practice,” ed. N. Depraz and A. Steinbock (2004); fr. Trans,  Husserl , ed. J. 
Benoist (Paris: Cerf, 2008). 
 27  Hua III, 50, English trans., 53: “In my waking consciousness I  ﬁ nd myself in this manner at all 
times, and without ever being able to alter the fact. … Immediately, physical things stand there as 
Objects of use, the ‘table’ with its ‘books,’ the ‘drinking glass,’ the ‘vase,’ the ‘piano, etc.” 
 28  Ibid . “[The world] is contingently ‘on hand’ for me and I myself am a member of it.” 
392
N. Depraz
 The Practice of the Phenomenologist: Attention, the Exemplary 
Operative “Support” ( Point d’appui ) of Experiential 
Phenomenology (§92) 
 With “attention,” which I just mentioned as the most focal mode of presence to the 
objects of the world, we actually have to do to the most acute practical method of 
phenomenology. I showed elsewhere how the attentional activity is the concrete 
name of epochē as an embodied activity. 29 More precisely, it corresponds to the 
experiential key-gesture of my inner organic relationship to myself. 
 In that respect, the §92 offers an incredible “précis” of operative methodology. 30 
Husserl describes here what he calls the “ attentionale Abwandlungen ” of the inten-
tional (here perceptual) activity of the subject. The word “ Abwandlung ” (translated 
in French by Ricœur with the term “ mutation ”) stresses the transformative and 
creative aspect of the “modi ﬁ cation, ” more accurately than what the sheer term 
“modi ﬁ cation” lets surge, which may only underline the modal aspect of the activity, 
its “how” component. With “ Abwandlung ” Husserl insists on the fact that attention 
generates a change into the activity itself that may change the latter as a whole, 
instead of modifying only one aspect of it. 
 The peculiar structural property of attentionality amounts to combining ( kreuzen ) 
and mixing ( mischen ) with other phenomena. In short, it is never given alone in a 
isolated way, but it structurally accompanies and fosters a given activity (may it be 
perceptual, imaginative, symbolic or empathetic). Furthermore, the attentional act is 
not described by Husserl as a mental invisible act (like in some classical psychological 
works), but as an organic inner move of a conscious subject: “ Wir sprechen im 
Gleichnis vom ‘geistigen Blick’ oder ‘Blickstrahl’ des reinen Ich, von seinen 
Zuwendungen und Absendungen. ” 31 Now, Husserl’s very expressions reveal the 
exact inner move of the reductive method, which is precisely described as a turning 
of the look (a “ conversion ,” from the Latin verb “ vertere ,” or again, in German “ sich 
wenden ”). The organicity of the attentional move thus amounts to describing the 
very move of the reduction. 32  Furthermore, Husserl describes this organic inner 
move as a selective and focalized direction going through a whole  ﬁ eld of different 
layers of phenomena (either spatial or temporal): “ Der Blickstrahl des reinen Ich 
geht bald durch diese, bald durch jene noetische Schicht oder (wie z.B. bei 
Erinnerungen in Erinnerungen) … durch diese oder jene Schachtelungsstufe (…) 
Innerhalb des gegebenen Gesamtfeldes … blicken wir bald auf ein Ganzes hin, den 
 29  N. Depraz, “The Phenomenological Reduction as Praxis,”  The View from Within: First-person 
Approaches to the Study of Consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, Special Issue, ed. F. 
J. Varela & J. Shear (1999). 
 30  For more details, see my article mentioned above, “Where is the Phenomenology of Attention 
Husserl Intended to Perform?” 
 31  Hua III, 198–190; English trans., 222: “We spoke metaphorically of the pure Ego’s ‘mental 
regard’ or the ‘rays of its regard,’ of its adverting toward and turning away from.” 
 32  N. Depraz,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue, op. cit., 159–161. 
393
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
Baum etwa, der perzeptiv gegenwärtig … Plötzlich wenden wir den Blick einem uns 
‘einfallenden’ Erinnerungsobjekt zu: statt durch die Wahrnehmungsnoese …, geht 
der Blick durch eine Erinnerungsnoese in eine Erinnerunswelt hinein, bewegt sich 
wandernd in dieser, geht in Erinnerungen anderer Stufen über oder in bloße 
Phantasiewelten … .” 33 
 In short, attention accounts for the concretely inner lived activity of the phenom-
enologist as a self-conscious subject. 
 The Practice of the Ethical Phenomenologist: A Lived 
Practical Ethics (§96) 
 From such a lived attentional practice to the  ﬁ rst-person concrete ethics which is 
described in §96, there is quite a small step, the one which goes from one “leg” of 
attention, more cognitive and focused (§92) to its other “leg,” more ethical and open 
to the world and the others (§96). Actually, attention is the common root of both 
legs, which both go “hand in hand,” besides! The French language shows this very 
well, insofar as the substantive “attention” gives way to two lightly different adjec-
tives, “ attentionnel ” and “ attentionné ,” which translate two different components of 
attention, its cognitive side and its ethical side. 
 §96 suggests some directions of a concrete practical ethics, which leads to under-
stand the descriptive activity as a practice to be cultivated rather than as a sheer 
technics in order to obtain results. It can be summarized according to  ﬁ ve features: 
(1) the leading thread of such a research ethics is faithfulness ( Treue ) to what is 
given and accuracy towards it, along with a being careful with what is given 
( Sorgfalt ) (2). This leading feature is typical of the experimental attitude in science; 
it goes hand in hand with an ability to effort and concentration ( Anstrengung ) (3), 
and with the sense of the precariousness and the  ﬁ nitude of descriptions, which 
provide the phenomenologist with the wisdom and the caution linked to the irreducible 
relativity of knowledge (4);  ﬁ nally, freedom is the whole spirit of the way of the 
philosopher, together with openness and the sense for discovering new territories 
(5). In that respect, the leading image/example of the traveler, who is always in 
quest of new areas, is highly telling for Husserl’s way of researching:  “… eins …
müssen wir anstreben, daß wir in jedem Schritte getreu beschreiben, was wir von 
unseren Augenpunkte aus und nach ernstestem Studium wirklich sehen. Unser 
 33  Hua III, 190; English trans., 223: “The ray of the pure Ego’s regard sometimes goes through one 
noetic stratum and sometimes through another. Or (as, e.g., in the case of remembering within 
remembering through one encasement-level or another … Within the total  ﬁ eld … we sometimes 
look at a whole, a tree, perhaps, which is perceptually present … Suddenly we turn our regard to 
an object of memory which ‘comes to mind’: Instead of going through the perceptual noesis, … 
the regard goes through a remembering noesis into a word of memory; it wanders about in this 
world, passes over into memories of other degrees or into worlds of phantasy, and so forth.” 
394
N. Depraz
Verfahren ist da seines Forschungsreisenden in einem unbekannten Weltteile, der 
sorgsam beschreibt, was sich ihm … darbietet. Ihm darf das sichere Bewußtsein 
erfüllen, zur Aussage zu bringen …, was, weil es treuer Ausdruck von Gesehenem 
ist,immerfort seinen Wert behält. In gleicher Gesinnung wollen wir … treue 
Darsteller der phänomenologischer Gestaltungen sein … . ” 34 
 In short, caution and patience are key-words in order to enter a true phenomeno-
logical ethics: they may serve as a general epistemological background in order to 
better understand the experimental character of phenomenology. 35 
 The Practice of the Phenomenological Experimentalist: §108 
 Such a stress on experimentation may lead us astray: we may believe that phenom-
enology has to become an experimental science with formal and focalized laboratory 
experiments. Not at all. Even though the need for experimenting is crucial, it is also 
crucial to keep, as Husserl says, the testimony, account and evidence of the natural 
language ( die natürliche Zeugnis ). 36 It actually belongs to the ethics just mentioned 
above and re-asserted at the end of the paragraph: “ Man muß hier nur wie überall in 
der Phänomenologie den Mut haben, daß im Phänomen wirklich zu Erschauende, 
statt es umzudeuten, eben hinzunehmen, wie es sich selbst gibt, und es ehrlich zu 
beschreiben. Alle Theorien haben sich darnach zu richten .” 37 
 The experimental example that is chosen by Husserl here, the “stereoscope,” is 
telling about his general hypothesis of the continuity between perception and imagi-
nation on the one side, and his structural will to bring together and articulate 
scienti ﬁ c experiments and daily life on the other side: “ Ins Stereoskop blickend, 
sagen wir, diese erscheinende Pyramide ist ‘nichts’, ist bloßer ‘Schein’: Das 
Erscheinende als solches ist das offenbare Subjekt der Prädikation und ihm (da sein 
Dingnoema aber nichts weniger als ein Ding ist) schreiben wir das zu, was wir an 
ihm selbst als Charakter vor ﬁ nden: eben die Nichtigkeit. ”(“Looking into the stereo-
scope, we say: this appearing as appearing is obviously the subject of predication 
 34  Hua  III, 201, English trans., 235: “… that at each step we faithfully describe what we, from our 
point of view and after the most serious study, actually see. Our procedure is that of an explorer 
journeying through an unknown part of the world, and carefully describing what is presented … 
Such an explorer can rightfully be  ﬁ lled with the sure con ﬁ dence that he gives utterance to what, 
… because it is the faithful expression of something seen, will always retain its value … With a like 
conviction, in the sequel we propose to be faithful describers of phenomenological structures …” 
Let us also mention that Ricœur translates quite interestingly “ treuer Darsteller ” (“faithful describ-
ers”) with the expression “ témoin  ﬁ dèle .” 
 35  N. Depraz,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue, op. cit., 164–166. 
 36  Hua III, 221, fr. Trans., 366. 
 37  Ibid . English trans., 257: “Here, as throughout phenomenology, one must have the courage to 
accept what is really to be seen in the phenomenon precisely as it presents itself rather than inter-
preting it away, and to honestly describe it. All theories must be directed accordingly.” 
395
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
and we ascribe to it (which is the thing-noema but not a physical thing) what we 
 ﬁ nd present in it as a characteristic—precisely nullity.”) Such an interest for 
depth perceptive phenomena is not an exception. It occurs very early 1901, 38 and 
re-appears in a structural way in the twenties in the course of Husserl’s description 
of the imaginative act. 39  Such an example generates a care for the genuineness 
of the appearing as appearing. As such it is exemplary of Husserl’s concrete and 
genuine way of proceeding. 40    
 From Reading to Writing: Producing a Detailed Individuated 
Example on the Basis of Husserl’s Generic One 
 My second step is the following: on the basis of such a practical and procedural 
reading I would like to suggest a mirror-practical writing. 
 An Experiential Method from Reading to Writing 
 The phenomenological practical writing I wish to present here both relies on 
Husserl’s way of providing us with experiential examples  and invents a more indi-
viduated way of doing so, namely while using the contemporary self-elicitation 
method suggested by P. Vermersch and more recently unfolded and developed by 
Claire Petitmengin. 
 I myself endeavored to adjust such a method to the philosophical work in my 
Research Seminar at the University of Rouen since last year while working together 
reading and writing as mirror-phenomena. I used my step-by-step practical reading 
of  Ideen I ,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue , and immersed the students in the third 
part of the  Analysen zur passiven Synthesis , “Association.” I had four different steps: 
 ﬁ rst I showed them concretely the difference between a critical reading (looking for 
concepts, argumentation, etc.) and a practical reading (looking for procedures, ways 
of doing) (as I showed above);  second  I asked them to notice and to write down the 
examples Husserl uses in this part(as I did above with a few paragraphs in  Ideen I ); 
 third (and that is what we are going to do now with one of the paragraphs here), 
I asked them to identify the structural features of a given example (it is an example, 
the sensory modality of which is the vision, the framework/set is mainly spatial and 
not time-embedded, it is an individual example (the others are not co-present), it is 
described in the  ﬁ rst person of the plural, etc., the emotional component is not put 
forward, etc.). So we have a certain amount of features that we can use in order to 
 38  LU V, §40, 491. 
 39  Hua XXIII, n°20: “Phastasie-Neutralität,” 574, 580, 583–584. See also pp. 75 and 135. 
 40  N. Depraz,  Lire Husserl en phénoménologue, op. cit. , 180–182. 
396
N. Depraz
create ( fourth step ) our own experiential setting. The advantage of such a method 
lies in the structural proximity with Husserl’s setting (which serves as a structural 
phenomenological guidance) and in the ability to discover from Husserl onward a 
personal experiential immersion. 
 Identifying the Structural Features of One Example in Husserl 
 Let us focus now again (for example) on our second paragraph (and on the example 
which is given in it). The §27 offers quite a daily experiential setting. I quote again: 
“ Für mich da sind wirkliche Objekte … Ich kann meine Aufmerksamekeit wandern 
lassen von dem eben gesehenen und beachteten Schreibtisch aus durch die ungeseh-
enen Teile des Zimmers hinter meinem Rücken zur Veranda, in den Garten, zu den 
Kindern in der Laube usw, zu all den Objekten, von denen ich gerade ‘weiß ’ , als da 
und dort in meiner unmittelbar mitbewußtenUmgebung seiend … ” 41 
 What are the structural features of this experiential setting? 1. It is a visual setting 
(sensory modality: “ eben gesehenen… ungesehenen ”); 2. It is at  ﬁ rst sight a focused 
vision (“ dem beachteten Schreibtisch ”); 3. It is a moving (technically said: “kinaes-
thetic”) perceptive activity, the sensory modality of which is not mentioned: we 
only know that it is not visual any more (“ ungesehenen Teile … hinter meinem 
Rücken ”), what is sometimes called in contemporary neurosciences an “ambient 
vision, ” quite akin to the Husserlian “co-perceived” and “horizonal-perceptive 
activity”; 4. Even though it is not mentioned by Husserl we may think of the presence 
of the auditive modality (given the presence of the children in the garden, probably 
speaking aloud, laughing, etc.). 5. Husserl names “attention” such an inner ability, 
supported by a sensory modality but also freeing itself from it. 
 Let us produce now a  ﬁ rst-person description that will conform to such structural 
features. 
 Putting to Work the Interview/Self-elicitation Method 
 Now, in order for a description to be truly a  ﬁ rst-person description, we need to 
check that we follow some clear instructions: the  ﬁ rst key-instruction, which is a 
standard common rule of every elicitation method is to refer to an experience which 
 41  Hua III, 48–49; English trans., 51: “Along with the ones now perceived, other actual objects are 
there for me…. I can let my attention wander away from the writing table which was just now seen 
and noticed, out through the unseen parts of the room which are behind my back, to the veranda, 
into the garden, to the children in the arbor, etc., to all the Objects I directly ‘know of’ as being 
there and here in the surroundings of which there is also consciousness.” 
397
23 Paul Ricoeur and the  Praxis of Phenomenology
is clearly individuated as a  nunc/hic experience. It has to be a unique experience and 
not a typical one, starting for example like: “I remember  usually sitting …,” which 
will only evoke the genericity of such an experience. The other key-instruction is to 
come back to this experience while re-living it, putting oneself again in the very 
concrete setting. Here you need to ask yourself the following questions, in order to 
check that you are embodying again the very situated moment: “When was it 
exactly? Where? With whom? In which emotional state was I?”; you also need to 
provide the most concrete and numerous details of the scene you may recall: it will 
be a good indication of the embodied and situated character of the experience. Third 
you need to come back a great number of times to this very singular experience in 
order to be able to unfold it in a deeper way and discover each time aspects that you 
 ﬁ rst did not recall. We do not have enough space here to engage in the third instruc-
tion, but it really needs to be done in a standard work in the sense that it provides the 
methodology with a quality of intra-subjective objectivity. 
 Here is the  ﬁ rst-person description which came back to my mind when I decided 
to do it last Monday, 20/09 (9.15–9.30 am): “I am sitting in a Brasserie in Paris next 
to the City Hall in the 17th Arrondissement. It is in June of this year. I just went to 
the City Hall to get information to have my passport renewed in order to be able to 
travel to the States in September. I brought some work to do and sit down in this 
coffee-shop in order to achieve the writing of my article about attention for the com-
ing  Alter volume about this theme. I am nearly alone in the coffee-shop, sitting on 
the left side near the comptoir. I order a big coffee with milk and a bread and butter 
and begin to type on my computer. I am eager at writing and glad to observe that I 
succeed in providing clear examples of the distinction between attention and con-
sciousness in phenomenology and in neuroscienti ﬁ c experiments. I have a feeling of 
satisfaction, of ease, nearly of enthusiasm. The man who served me the coffee is 
talking with somebody else, but I nearly do not care about their discussion; he jokes 
with me a couple of times (bringing me the coffee, then a glass of water I asked him 
for,  ﬁ nally the bill) and each times creates a small rupture of my attention directed 
towards the writing. He compels me to change my attentional direction towards 
him, but I lightly notice that it does not really disturb me, it is only a small atten-
tional change and I spontaneously immerse myself again into my own writing 
activity.” 
 Once this  ﬁ rst experiential unfolding is produced, the next step is to come back 
to the experience and its writing, either with the help of a guide (who asks non-
inductive questions) or alone, re-reading one’s own text and asking oneself ques-
tions according to the different sequences of the event and relying on certain 
intriguing expressions: “and when I write (you say) that I (you) am eager at writing, 
what do I (you) do?” Or: “and when I (you) notice that it does not really disturb me 
(you), what do I (you) do?” Etc. While doing so, you are able to dig further into your 
own experience and discover tiny  ﬁ rst unseen aspects of it in a very disciplined 
scienti ﬁ c way. 
 Of course what I indicate here is the very  ﬁ rst thrust of a  ﬁ rst-person methodological 
phenomenology. It needs to be developed and taught further.  
398
N. Depraz
 A Concluding Suggestion for Experimenting 
in a First-Person Way 
 In order to really “do” phenomenology I suggest to use the last example provided 
by Husserl, the stereogram, as a support for unfolding such a methodology. 
 Here are the steps to be walked:
 1.  Read §108 again. 
 2.  Identify the structural features of the depth-perception example. 
 3.   Recall one singular experience supported by such structural features but concretely 
“indexicalysed.”  
 4.  Unfold this experience with as many details as possible always keeping this 
embodied way of recalling/reliving it. 
 5.  Come back to one’s own  ﬁ rst-person description and dig further through self-
questions (this has to be done as much as possible in terms of number of times, 
but we won’t do it here/today because of our lack of time). 
 Conclusion 
 What is the bene ﬁ t of such an experiential reading of Husserl’s phenomenology in 
 Ideen I , for philosophy on the one hand, for phenomenology on the other hand, for 
our contemporary world  ﬁ nally? First, it helps better understand what phenomenology 
is as a science of experience, namely, better see the meaning of Husserl’s stress on 
coming back to the things themselves. Second, it provides a rigorous method in 
order to convince non-philosophers that philosophy is talking about concrete and 
universal problems and phenomena, and that it has a meaning for our life, which is 
the least one is entitled to expect from a wisdom tracing back from Socrates’s  gnôthi 
seauton . Third, it opens the way for a revolutionary epistemology based on singu-
larity (in contrast with the usual motto according to which there is only science of 
the general) and unfolding objectivation from the very singular, thus providing us 
with an embodied scienti ﬁ city, which is what needs to be achieved for epistemology 
today if we want to develop our re ﬂ ection in deep contact with the concrete reality 
of our life and keep in mind the urgent necessity of ethics within scienti ﬁ c work. 
399
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_24, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I in Germany 
 The post-war years marked the collapse of the political opposition to Husserl’s 
phenomenology and gave rise to the emergence of a new interest in phenomenology. 
The difference between the years of silence that preceded the war and the years 
that followed it was so startling, that some were led to speak of the possibility of a 
kind of “Husserl-Renaissance.” 1 The political changes could not by themselves 
give rise to such a renaissance. The philosophical landscape in Germany had 
changed. A new task was to evaluate Husserl’s phenomenology in the context of 
the current philosophical problems. 
 Due to the almost complete silence that embraced Husserl’s phenomenology during 
the years of the war, it was not possible to transform Husserl’s phenomenology into a 
once-again living philosophical tradition in Germany without  ﬁ rst appropriating the 
phenomenological work that had been pursued elsewhere. Thus, during the  ﬁ rst few 
decades that followed the war, phenomenology in Germany was under the guidance 
of French and Dutch phenomenologists. Jean-Paul Sartre’s and Merleau-Ponty’s 
in ﬂ uence was particularly strong. According to Ernst Wolfgang Orth and Thomas 
Seebohm, this in ﬂ uence was vital throughout the  ﬁ rst phase of post-War phenome-
nology in Germany, which began with the publication of  Husserliana in 1950 and 
 S.  Geniusas (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Chinese University of Hong Kong , 
 Shatin, New Territories ,  Hong Kong 
e-mail:  geniuasas@cuhk.edu.hi 
 Chapter 24 
 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I 
and Re ﬂ ection 
 Saulius  Geniusas   
 1  See Hans Wagner, “Kritische Bemerkungen zu Husserls Nachlass,”  Philosophische Rundschau I 
(1953/54): 2. For the English translation, see Hans Wagner, “Critical Observations Concerning 
Husserl’s Posthumous Writings,”  The Phenomenology of Husserl , ed. R.O. Elveton (Chicago: 
Quadrangle Books, 1970), 204. 
400
S. Geniusas
which ended with the founding of the German Society for Phenomenological 
Research in 1970. 2 
 The possibility of a “Husserl Renaissance” in Germany was  ﬁ rst and foremost 
associated with two factors: the opening of the Husserl Archives in Freiburg (1949) 
and Cologne (1951) as well as the edition of Husserl’s collected works,  Husserliana . 
The Husserl Archives in Freiburg and Cologne invited a plethora of philosophers 
from abroad, who had either continued working in the phenomenological tradition, 
or were heavily in ﬂ uenced by this tradition, during the years when virtually no such 
work had been conducted in Germany. 3 Frederik Buytendijk, Eric Weil, Hendrik 
Pos, Wladislaw Tatarkiewicz, Jean Beaufret, Gabriel Marcel, Hannah Arendt, Hans 
Jonas, Aron Gurwitsch, Jan Patocka, Jean Hyppolite, and Alphonse De Waelhens 
delivered lectures at the newly opened Husserl Archives in Germany. 4 
 1950 marked the publication of the  ﬁ rst three volumes of  Husserliana .  Ideen I 
was published as the third volume in this series.  Ideen II and  III appeared in print a 
few years later . This was the fourth edition of  Ideen I to appear in German. In the 
only review of  Ideen I that was published in 1950s, L.O. Katsoff lauds Walter 
Biemel’s edition, especially for including supplementary texts from the  Nachlass . 5 
In the mid 1960s, Gerhard Maschke was already working on a new edition of  Ideen 
I that was supposed to revise and correct the supplementary material found in 
Biemel’s edition. Karl Schuhmann’s newly edited volume of  Ideen I (as well as 
 Ideen II ) was published in 1976. 
 The new studies in phenomenology to emerge in post-war Germany grew out of 
the Husserl Archives in Louvain, Freiburg, and Cologne. These studies were primarily 
 2  See the entry on Germany, compiled by Ernst Wolfgang Orth and Thomas M. Seebohm, 
 Encyclopedia of Phenomenology, ed. Lester Embree, et al. (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1997), 274. 
 3  Friedrich Kreis’s  Phänomenologie und Kritizismus (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1930) and Rudolf 
Zocher’s  Husserl’s Phänomenologie und Schuppes Logik (München: Reinhardt, 1932) were the 
 ﬁ rst published critical discussions of Husserl’s thought in Germany. In 1933, Eugen Fink had 
responded to this critique in his famous “Die phänomenologische Philosophie Edmund Husserls in 
der gegenwärtigen Kritik,”  Kant Studien XXXVIII (1933). This debate between Zocher and Fink 
was the last published critical discussion of Husserl in Germany until the end of the war. The last 
German reviews of Husserl’s work before the war were also published in 1933. Roman Ingarden 
published a relatively brief review of  Formal and Transcendental Logic and Helmut Kuhn pub-
lished a rather detailed review of the  Cartesian Meditations (both appeared in  Kant Studien 
XXXVIII , 1933) . Of course, one cannot overlook Ludwig Landgrebe’s edition of  Erfahrung und 
Urteil (Prague: Academia-Verlag, 1938). Yet this highly important contribution to Husserl’s phe-
nomenology, which appeared in print brie ﬂ y after Husserl’s death, was not published in Germany, 
and the meager 200 printed copies were available only in Great Britain and the United States, not 
in Germany. Eugen Fink’s “Das Problem der Phänomenologie Edmund Husserls”(1938) is another 
noteworthy exception. Yet just as with Landgrebe’s work, this text also did not make any impact on 
German philosophy at the time of its publication. 
 4  See in this regard T. Vongehr, “A Short History of the Husserl-Archives,”  Geschichte des Husserl-
Archivs/History of the Husserl-Archives (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007), 111. 
 5  L. O. Kattsoff, “Husserls Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie, Erstes Buch,”  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 12 (1951). 
401
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
concerned with Husserl’s so far unpublished manuscripts. Although references to 
 Ideen I  in these works appear only in passing, such a situation is not to be seen as a 
sign of indifference to  Ideen I . On the contrary, it springs from the assumption that 
the philosophical community remains familiar with  Ideen I and that this work retains 
its unsurpassed role in phenomenology. 6  
 One could roughly divide phenomenological research conducted in post-war 
Germany into three groups. The  ﬁ rst entails careful studies of particular subject 
matters in Husserl’s phenomenology (such as the constitution of space, time and 
intersubjectivity) on the basis of the so-far unpublished manuscripts. The works by 
Hermann Ulrich Asemissen 7 and Klaus Hartmann 8 serve as examples of such 
research in 1950s. The studies undertaken by Alois Roth, 9 Klaus Held, 10  and Ulrich 
Claesges 11 are representative of such research being undertaken a decade later. 
The second group of works incorporates new attempts to give a comprehensive 
account of Husserl’s phenomenology on the basis of the new literature that has 
become available since the opening of the Husserl-Archives. Alwin Diemer’s, 12 
Helmuth Plessner’s, 13 Walter Biemel’s, 14 Wilhelm Szilasi’s, 15 and Wolfgang-Herrmann 
Müller’s 16 studies represent this second group. The third group embraces those 
works whose principal goal was to bring Husserl’s phenomenology into dialogue 
with other philosophical traditions. This third group of works could be further 
divided into two sub-groups. Gerhard Brand’s, 17 Ludwig Landgrebe’s 18 and Eugen 
Fink’s 19 late works as well as Gadamer’s shorter pieces 20 exemplify phenomenology’s 
 6  E.g., “I may surely assume knowledge of the  ﬁ rst volume of the  Ideas ” (Hans Wagner,  op. cit. , 8); 
or, “to this day  Ideen I has not lost its preeminent role in the phenomenological discussions” (Jan 
Broekman,  op. cit. , 20). 
 7  Hermann Ulrich Asemissen, “Strukturanalytische Probleme der Wahrnehmung in der 
Phänomenologie Husserl,”  Kant-Studien 73 (1957). 
 8  Klaus Hartmann,  Husserls Einfühlungstheorie auf monadologischer Grundlage (Diss.: Bonn 1953).  
 9  Alois Roth,  Edmund Husserls ethische Untersuchungen (The Hague: Martinus Nojhoff, 1960). 
 10  Klaus Held,  Lebendige Gegenwart: Die Frage nach der Seinsweise des transzendentalen Ich bei 
Edmund Husserl (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966). 
 11  Ulrich Claesges,  Edmund Husserl’s Theorie der Raumkonstitution (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1964). 
 12  Alwin Diemer  Edmund Husserl. Versuch einer systematischen Darstellung seiner Phänomenologie 
(Meisenheim am Glan, 1956). 
 13  Helmuth Plessner,  Husserl in Göttingen (Diss.: Vandehoeck & Ruprecht, 1959). 
 14  Walter Biemel, “Die entscheidenden Phasen in Husserls Philosophie,”  Zeitschrift 13 (1959). 
 15  Wilhelm Szilasi,  Einführung in die Phänomenologie Edmund Husserls (Tübingen: Max 
Niemeyer, 1959). 
 16  Wolfgang-Herrmann Müller,  Die Philosophie E. Husserls nach den Grundzügen ihrer Entstehung 
und ihrem systematischen Gehalt (Bonn, 1956). 
 17  Gerhard Brand,  Welt, Ich und Zeit (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1955). 
 18  Ludwig Landgrebe,  Philosophie der Gegenwart , op. cit., and  Der Weg der Phänomenologie 
(Gütersloh: G. Mohn, 1963). 
 19  Eugen Fink.  Welt und Endlichkeit (Würzburg: Königshausen und Neumann, 1990). 
 20  Hans-Georg Gadamer, “Die Phänomenologische Bewegung,” op. cit. 
402
S. Geniusas
aim to open a dialogue with hermeneutics. The works by Gerhard Funke, 21 Iso 
Kern, 22 Thomas Seebohm 23 and Hans-Ulrich Hoche 24 are representative of the aim 
to continue the dialogue with Kant and Neo-Kantianism. The interest in the inter-
sections of Husserl’s phenomenology and transcendental idealism was especially 
strong among the representatives of the “Mainz School of Phenomenology.” 
 Theodor Adorno’s critique of Husserl’s phenomenology appeared in print in 
1956. 25 This critique signi ﬁ cantly in ﬂ uenced the negative reception of Husserl’s 
phenomenology by the Frankfurt school in general. For instance, Habermas’ critique 
of Husserl in  Erkenntnis und Interesse was heavily indebted to Adorno’s work. 26 
This critique did not provoke post-war German phenomenologists to formulate a 
full- ﬂ edged response, arguably because it was viewed as too distant from what 
Husserl actually had to say. In Jan Broekman’s  Phänomenologie und Egologie 27 one 
 ﬁ nds a set of responses to Adorno scattered over different pages, which emphasize 
the remoteness of Adorno’s critique from Husserl’s phenomenological program. 
 The Concept of Re ﬂ ection 
 It is only to be expected that a philosophy that calls itself transcendental will sooner or 
later confront questions concerning the relation between the two separate domains, the 
 mundane and the  transcendental . In the case of phenomenology, this issue is as old as 
Husserl’s identi ﬁ cation of phenomenology as transcendental philosophy. This problem 
gained special importance after the publication of  Ideen I —Husserl’s  ﬁ rst work in print 
to announce the transcendental standpoint of phenomenology. The relation between the 
transcendental and the mundane once again became an issue of considerable 
importance in Germany after  Ideen I  was published in the  Husserliana series in 
1950. His transcendentalism became a cause of deep concern for reasons that have to 
do not so much with his own phenomenology, but rather with Heidegger’s fundamental 
ontology and Kant’s transcendental philosophy. 28  
 21  Gerhard Funke,  Zur transzendentalen Philosophie (Bonn 1957). 
 22  Iso Kern,  Husserl und Kant: Eine Untersuchung über Husserls Verhältnis zu Kant und zum 
Neukantianismus (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1964). 
 23  Thomas Seebohm,  Die Bedingungen der Möglichkeit der Transzendental-Philosophie (Bonn, 1962). 
 24  Hans-Ulrich Hoche,  Nichtempirische Erkenntnis. Analytische und synthetische Urteile a priori 
bei Kant und bei Husserl (Meinsheim am Glan, 1964). 
 25  Theodor Adorno,  Zur Metakritik der Erkenntnistheorie. Studien über Husserl und die phänom-
enologische Antinomien (Stuttgart, 1956). 
 26  Jürgen Habermas,  Erkenntnis und Interesse (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1968). 
 27  See Jan Broekman,  Phänomenologie und Egologie: Faktisches and transzendentales Ego bei 
Edmund Husserl , (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1963), 28–43. 
 28  On the one hand, in the speci ﬁ cally phenomenological framework, it was not clear how one could 
still maintain the separation of the transcendental and the mundane domains in light of Heidegger’s 
fundamental ontology, which increasingly grew to be viewed as a radicalization of Husserl’s 
phenomenology. On the other hand, in the context of transcendental philosophy, a worry arose that 
Husserl’s alternative to Kant might lead to a philosophically infeasible position. 
403
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
 I will limit myself to one illustration of such a reaction. 29 F.H. Heinemann writes:
 If he doubted the existence of the world with its mountains and rivers, trees, plants, and 
animals, how could he help doubting his own existence in this speci ﬁ c body? He therefore 
went on from human loneliness to transcendental loneliness. “I have become,” he said, “the 
transcendental Ego”; and this was true. He did not talk as his own natural self, but as an 
anonymous transcendental Ego, as a consciousness in general, as  Bewusstsein überhaupt , 
in Kant’s sense. Here we have reached the central point,  Husserl’s philosophy is the 
philosophy of the lonely transcendental Self. We have simultaneously reached the point 
where we can  ﬁ x Husserl’s position in the history of modern self-estrangement … Husserl’s 
method is of interest to us as an expression of self-estrangement. 30 
 This split between the transcendental and the mundane ego is allegedly a 
 philosophical invention. What this invention gives rise to is by no means just a set of 
innocent problems. The phenomenological reduction places subjectivity within the 
shell of its transcendentality, from within which it can no longer escape. The ego, as 
soon as it recognizes itself as transcendental, sets ablaze all the bridges that could 
lead it back to actuality. To borrow a metaphor from Jan Broekman, if one could 
liken the transcendental ego to a house, then one would have to say that this house 
has no windows, no walls, no doors, i.e., that it is a “pure” house. 31  
 Why would Husserl insist that subjectivity is given to itself as both mundane 
and transcendental? Arguably, such a twofold self-apperception is grounded in 
 re ﬂ ection . To support such a view, I will start with the analysis of re ﬂ ection in 
 Ideen I . In broad strokes, I will paint a picture of phenomenological re ﬂ ection 
conceived as a radicalization of mundane and psychological re ﬂ ection. 
 Re ﬂ ection as a Modi ﬁ cation 
 Ideen I has been often accused for leaping over into the transcendental domain without 
suf ﬁ cient preparation: supposedly, the sudden transcendental turn leaves phenome-
nology empty of content. 32  However, if one focuses on re ﬂ ection, the transcendental 
 29  The  ﬁ rst chapter of Jan Broekman’s  Phänomenologie und Egologie , signi ﬁ cantly titled “Das 
Verhältnis vom faktischen und transzendentalen ego in der Kritik an Edmund Husserl,” provides an 
extensive list of different works, where such a critical reaction can be found. We  ﬁ nd it in the works 
written by A. Schutz, H. Wagner, J. König, H. Plessner, H. Assemissen, L. Landgrebe, L. Binswanger, 
and F. Heinemann. The Kantian and hermeneutical in ﬂ uence is strongly visible not only in such a 
reaction, but even in Broekman’s own presentation of this reaction, as can already be seen in the title 
of his work: the operative distinction between the factual and the transcendental, while common in 
Kantian and hermeneutical literature, is rarely, if ever, found in Husserl’s works. Husserl replaces this 
distinction with a twofold opposition: factual vs. eidetic and mundane vs. transcendental. So as not to 
obscure this distinction, in the present context I will speak of the mundane and transcendental ego.  
 30  F.H. Heinemann,  Existenz-philosophie lebendig oder tot? (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag,1954), 
p. 53. For the English translation, see F. H. Heinemann,  Existentialism and the Modern Predicament 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1958), 53. 
 31  Jan Broekman,  op. cit. , 30. 
 32  Husserl himself refers to this critique in Hua VI, §43. For a forceful account of this critique, see 
Iso Kern, “Die drei Wege zur transzendental-phänomenlogischen Reduktion in der Philosophie 
Edmund Husserls,”  Tijdschrift voor Filoso ﬁ e 24/1. 
404
S. Geniusas
turn no longer appears so startling. In §38 and §45 we  ﬁ nd the account of how re ﬂ ection 
functions in the natural attitude, while §§77–79 deepen these preliminary delibera-
tions with an inquiry into what makes re ﬂ ection speci ﬁ cally phenomenological. 
Husserl hardly considers these “re ﬂ ections on re ﬂ ection” peripheral. As he remarks, 
“the theme of a leading chapter of phenomenology … is to distinguish the different 
‘re ﬂ ections’ and to analyze them completely in systematic order.” 33  
 In mundane experience, re ﬂ ection emerges as a  modi ﬁ cation . 34 Re ﬂ ection signals 
the turning of regard from the  object of experience to  experience , e.g., from the 
perceived to the perceiving, from the remembered to remembering, etc. Moreover, 
re ﬂ ection brings it to light that the  ego of straightforward experience is initially 
given as self-opaque and anonymous.  Re ﬂ ection thereby signals a twofold 
modi ﬁ cation (1)  in the givenness of experience and (2)  in the givenness of the ego : 
the initially latent, non-thematic ego is now given as an intentional object. 
 However, the constant conversion of latency into patency does not erase the split 
between the re ﬂ ecting ego and the ego-re ﬂ ected-upon.  The performing ego is always 
latent , no matter if the performance in question is a straightforward or a re ﬂ ective 
experience. The performing ego can be rendered thematic only if a new  latent ego 
transforms it into an intentional object. 
 Does this realization not force one to acknowledge signi ﬁ cant limits of re ﬂ ection? 
Moreover, if the task of phenomenology is that of providing an account of subjectivity 
on the basis of re ﬂ ection, then are we not to conclude that this account can never be 
carried through to its end? 
 From  Ideen I , one can extract three answers to this question. 35  First, experience hardly 
supports the suspicion that re ﬂ ection always remains cut-off from unre ﬂ ected expe-
rience. If such were the case, you would be maintaining too much if you were now to 
observe that you were just reading an essay on re ﬂ ection and that you are still reading it. 
Secondly, the outlined worry is an instance of a performative contradiction. After all, if 
the suspicion in question is not to remain an empty concern, it must  ﬁ nd some support 
in re ﬂ ection. That is,  re ﬂ ection itself  must ground the cognitive value that this skeptical 
worry about re ﬂ ection expresses. Thirdly, this suspicion presupposes the givenness of 
both re ﬂ ective and pre-re ﬂ ective experience as two separate data of experience. Yet how 
can pre-re ﬂ ective experience be given if not through re ﬂ ection? 
 33  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie . 
 Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie , ed. Walter Biemel (The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1950), 147–48. Hereafter, Hua III. For the English translation, see Edmund 
Husserl,  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , First 
Book, trans. F. Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983). 
 34  Originary experiences, which Husserl calls impressions, cannot be re ﬂ ective. Something must be 
 ﬁ rst given so that it can be re ﬂ ected upon. This “something in question” is unre ﬂ ective experience.  
 35  Husserl addresses this very problem in the context of his critique of H. J. Watt’s methodological 
skepticism, which is explicitly directed against empirical psychology, but which Husserl also 
presumes to be directed against his phenomenology (See Hua III, §79). According to Watt, what is 
given in re ﬂ ection is not experience pure and simple, but rather experience-as-given-to-re ﬂ ection. 
On such a view, the supposition that re ﬂ ection can generate knowledge valid for all experience is 
an ungrounded assumption. 
405
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
 Thus even though the gap between the latent and the patent ego is irremovable, it 
does not justify the skeptical concern because the re ﬂ ecting ego recognizes itself as 
the ego-re ﬂ ected-upon. Even though one can always re ﬂ ect on the act of re ﬂ ection 
 ad in ﬁ nitum , such an in ﬁ nite projection of re ﬂ ections does not force one to give up 
the legitimacy of re ﬂ ective self-givenness. 
 Mundane and Psychological Re ﬂ ection 
 What motivates re ﬂ ection? Clearly, the reasons are numerous; less clearly, different 
reasons give rise to different  types  of re ﬂ ection. I will begin by distinguishing mundane 
and psychological re ﬂ ection. 
 What is speci ﬁ c about mundane re ﬂ ection? At all times, it is guided by the interest 
in the  object of experience. This interest constitutes the horizon of mundane 
re ﬂ ection. In the case of perception, I can turn my attention from the seen object to 
the seeing of it for the sole purpose of assuring myself that the object in question is 
indeed what I thought it was. I can ask myself, is it really true that the melody I hear 
is Rachmaninov’s Piano Concerto No. 2? When doubt arises, re ﬂ ection comes to the 
rescue. When I run through the melody in my still fresh memory, I either obtain 
more evidence to support my earlier judgment, or re ﬂ ection forces me to abandon 
the earlier verdict: what I hear is Eric Carmen’s “All By Myself,” which in many 
regards is all-too-close to Rachmaninov’s second movement. Thus in the case of 
mundane re ﬂ ection, the shaking of the certainty of experience and the striving to 
ascertain new certainty is the motivating force that gives rise to re ﬂ ection. 
 Yet re ﬂ ection need not be conceived as merely a useful interruption in the 
objectively oriented  ﬂ ow of experience. While the relation to objects and the 
world constitutes the horizon of mundane re ﬂ ection, psychological re ﬂ ection 
aims to set such a mundane horizon out of play. Psychological re ﬂ ection enables 
one to redirect one’s interest from objects to experience  with the sole interest in 
thematizing the subject of this experience . 
 Above I spoke of re ﬂ ection as a turning of regard from objects to experience and as 
the thematization of the initially latent ego of experience. This distinction allows one to 
pinpoint a limit of mundane re ﬂ ection.  This type of re ﬂ ection knows nothing of the ego . 
When mundane re ﬂ ection awakens an interest in experience, it does so without any 
concern for the subject of this experience. By contrast, for psychological re ﬂ ection the 
thematization of experience is not just a detour that one takes so as to secure the meaning 
of a particular objectivity. Psychological re ﬂ ection is directed solely at subjectivity.  
 Psychological and Phenomenological Re ﬂ ection 
 Yet such exclusive interest in subjectivity remains ambiguous. As Husserl has it, the 
world thesis, “the world is always already there,” underlies every act of natural 
consciousness, even though this thesis is not articulated in an explicit judgment. 
406
S. Geniusas
But if the world-thesis underlies all acts, then clearly, by merely orienting re ﬂ ection 
exclusively at subjectivity one does not put this thesis out of play: the thematization 
of subjectivity is still under the spell of the world-thesis. 
 This becomes clear when one asks: what exactly is given to re ﬂ ection when it 
directs itself to subjectivity? The answer seems to be obvious: it is I, this human being, 
living in this natural world. If we further ask, what exactly are we to understand by the 
term “human being,” the answer leads back to some kind of a unity of body and soul. 
Yet clearly, the meaning of these terms, “a human being,” “body,” and “soul,” derives 
from mundane consciousness. This means that the alleged turn from the objective to 
the subjective is still inundated with non-re ﬂ ective dimensions of sense: the re ﬂ ective 
turn is not as radical as it meant to be. 
 Husserl calls such a turn to subjectivity  psychological ; the re ﬂ ection peculiar to it 
he calls “inner sense.”  This type of re ﬂ ection generates the  ﬁ rst notion of the mundane 
ego in Husserl’s phenomenology . This notion refers to the ego after re ﬂ ection is set in 
place, yet before the reduction of the world-thesis is carried through. Husserl’s refusal 
to restrict subjectivity to such a mundane ego issues from the realization that the 
psychological self-apperception rests on unquestioned presuppositions. What remains 
unquestioned is the natural world, conceived as the ultimate horizon of all possible 
sense. Only within such a horizon can subjectivity be seen as a mundane ego, 
conceived as a unity of body and soul. 
 Phenomenological re ﬂ ection is meant to be a radicalization of both mundane and 
psychological re ﬂ ection. Along with mundane re ﬂ ection, phenomenological re ﬂ ection 
enacts a turn of regard from the objects of experience to experience. However, realizing 
that such a re ﬂ ective move, when it remains guided by the objectively oriented interests, 
does not give rise to an understanding of subjectivity, phenomenological re ﬂ ection 
follows in the footsteps of psychological re ﬂ ection and directs its  exclusive  interest to 
the ego of experience. Finally, in contrast to psychological re ﬂ ection, phenomenological 
re ﬂ ection puts in brackets the horizon of positing consciousness. And if we now ask, 
what is it that is truly given to such a phenomenological re ﬂ ection, then Husserl’s answer 
points in the direction of  transcendental consciousness. 
 Why would Husserl refer to this “residual” consciousness as transcendental? 
This consciousness manifests itself as a correlate of all possible objects of experi-
ence. Such a correlational framework opens a new sphere of research: it now 
becomes necessary to account for how any unity of sense can be correlated with 
consciousness. To address this issue, one must turn to the transcendental structure 
of consciousness. Husserl’s analyses of hyletic, noetic and noematic structures of 
consciousness are the answer he provides to this very question. 
 Phenomenological Re ﬂ ection as Eidetic Description 
 Husserl calls transcendental consciousness  pure consciousness , which suggests 
that it has “lifted” itself out of the mundane horizon and thereby has been puri ﬁ ed 
of the naturalistic presuppositions. Yet even when phenomenological re ﬂ ection is 
407
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
conceived as pure re ﬂ ection, its sense still remains indeterminate. To make it more 
precise, Husserl quali ﬁ es it as  eidetic re ﬂ ection  (e.g.,  Ideen I , §78 and §86). 
 When phenomenological re ﬂ ection thematizes consciousness as a correlate of 
objective unities of sense, it does not concern itself with the idiosyncrasies of any 
particular consciousness. What interests phenomenology is consciousness  as such , 
conceived as a correlate of sense-unities. So as to arrive at an understanding of such 
a consciousness, it proves necessary to transform one’s own conscious acts into 
mere instances of any consciousness. Moreover, I must subject my particular 
conscious experience to an eidetic variation ( Ideen I, §70), which enables phenom-
enology to accomplish one of its fundamental goals, viz., identify the invariant 
structures of transcendental consciousness. 
 Yet the characterization of phenomenology as an eidetic science gives rise to new 
ambiguities. We become aware of them when we question phenomenology’s relation 
to other eidetic sciences. One can read §§71–75 of  Ideen I  as Husserl’s search for an 
example of the kind of eidetic science phenomenology is. However, this search leads to 
the realization that there is no such example to be found: phenomenology is a  unique 
eidetic science primarily because it proceeds on the basis of  eidetic descriptions.  
 First, the comparison of phenomenology with arithmetic brings to light the 
 distinction between  formal and  material eidetic sciences. Since phenomenology is 
concerned with living experiences, it cannot be a formal science, and thus must be 
material. Secondly, within the domain of material eidetic sciences, the comparison 
with geometry gives rise to a further distinction between  concrete and  abstract 
eidetic sciences. Unlike geometry, which proceeds non-intuitively and deductively, 
phenomenology limits itself to what is given in intuition and in this regard it is a 
concrete material eidetic science. 
 These distinctions between phenomenology and mathematical sciences bring 
phenomenology into proximity with the natural sciences. Thus thirdly, one 
needs to clarify the difference between them. Unlike natural sciences, phenom-
enology cannot proceed on the basis of induction, if only because it has already 
placed both deductive and inductive logic within the  epochē . Then how does 
phenomenology as a material and concrete eidetic science unfold? It unfolds on 
the basis of eidetic descriptions; and when it does rely on mediate inferences, 
this reliance has only the methodological meaning of leading to eidetic descrip-
tions: “in the end the conjectures must be redeemed by the real vision of the 
essential connections” (Hua III, 193). 
 Allow me to brie ﬂ y turn to a passage in  Ideen I , which I believe is quite often 
misinterpreted. In §78, Husserl remarks that re ﬂ ection brings out the meaning of 
experiences in their reduced form and that the re ﬂ ecting consciousness can in a 
universal way grasp the right of such experiences. Husserl writes: “we grasp the 
 absolute right of immanent  perceiving re ﬂ ection … likewise, the  absolute right 
of immanent retention …. We likewise grasp the  relative right of immanent recol-
lection” (Hua III, 150). Sometimes this distinction between the absolute and relative 
right of different experiences is understood as indicative of certain limits of 
“static” phenomenology in general, and of  Ideen I  in particular. Supposedly, the 
methodological framework that Husserl presents in this work restricts  phenomenology 
408
S. Geniusas
only to what is given in the present; experiences of the past and of the future lie 
beyond its reach. 36  
 I do not want to challenge the claim that genetic phenomenology provides an 
alternative access to the phenomenological  ﬁ eld. Yet in the passage above, Husserl’s 
point is far removed from what this critique  ﬁ nds objectionable. Here the question 
is not that of how phenomenology must temporally circumscribe phenomenological 
“data.” Rather, what we  ﬁ nd in this passage are illustrations of the invariant struc-
tures of consciousness. All that Husserl is saying here is this: we grasp, with  univer-
sal insight , that immanent perception and immanent retention are indubitable, while 
immanent recollection is dubitable. This distinction does not refer to a peculiarity of 
 my own consciousness; having its basis in descriptive eidetics, it is an invariant 
structure of consciousness as such. 
 The Mundane and the Transcendental Ego 
 Husserl’s thought experiment regarding the annihilation of the world ( Ideen I , §49) 
constitutes one of the most contestable issues in Husserl’s phenomenology as a 
whole. 37  This hypothesis has been attacked for the lack of phenomenological 
evidence to support it as well as for distorting the sense of our facticity. 
 Does the notion of absolute consciousness, conceived as a residuum left 
unaffected by the annihilation of the world, not resemble a house with no windows 
and no walls? In a way, it does;  yet precisely therefore such a consciousness hardly 
plays a signi ﬁ cant role in Husserl’s phenomenology. For Husserl, the experiment of 
the annihilation of the world is not meant to open the door to the analysis of absolute 
consciousness as it manifests itself  after the world-annihilation. On the contrary, 
this section is meant to convince us that the being of the world is  relative to 
consciousness—an insight that leads phenomenology to raise the question of the 
world’s constitution. 
 If one places §49 back in the context within which it appears, it becomes clear that 
the question regarding the relation between the transcendental and the mundane ego 
does not lie beyond the reach of phenomenological re ﬂ ection. The experiment of the 
world’s annihilation, far from signaling, as Heinemann has it, a type of self- alienation, 
in fact gives rise to a new and enriched understanding of the mundane ego. In the 
sections that follow this thought experiment, Husserl shows that the constitution of 
the world is possible only if it goes hand-in-hand with a self-constitution, understood 
 36  See Iso Kern,  op. cit ., and Sebastian Luft, “Husserl’s Theory of the Phenomenological Reduction: 
Between Life-World and Cartesianism,”  Research in Phenomenology 34/1 (2004): 210. 
 37  As Husserl has it, while the being of transcendent objects and the world itself is relative to con-
sciousness, consciousness itself  nulla ‘re’ indiget ad existendum . On Husserl’s view, it suf ﬁ ces to 
subtract the objectivating function from lived experiences to render conceivable the non-being of 
the world; yet such a subtraction would nonetheless leave consciousness itself intact. 
409
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
as a kind of self-objecti ﬁ cation, due to which one always already  ﬁ nds oneself in the 
midst of the world. For instance, in §53 Husserl turns to an explicit analysis of how 
the mundane ego relates to the transcendental ego—a theme with which the notori-
ous §49 ends. What we  ﬁ nd in this section is the very same paradox of subjectivity 
that we also encounter in many of Husserl’s other writings. 38 As Husserl puts it, “on 
 the one hand consciousness should be the Absolute , within which everything tran-
scendent is constituted, and in the last resort the whole psychological world; and  on 
the other hand  consciousness should be a  subordinate real event within this world . 
How does this tally?” (Hua III, 103) 
 That this equivocation is not accidental becomes clear when one asks, how is 
it possible for consciousness to be given to itself as mundane and transcendental? 
What underlies this paradox is a particular type of self-apperception: according 
to Husserl’s sketchy remarks, through an empirical relation to the body, consciousness 
puts on the character of transcendence and “enters” the real world. Through an 
intimate link to the body, “a distinctive  transcendence shapes itself: a  state of 
consciousness appears which is the state of a self-identical  real ego-subject” 
 (Ideen I , §53). 
 Admittedly, Husserl’s curtailed account of this paradox in  Ideen I  is only a 
blueprint. Yet from this blueprint one could derive a signi ﬁ cantly different 
notion of the mundane ego from the one that I have sketched while addressing 
psychological re ﬂ ection. According to the  ﬁ rst conception, our understanding 
of the mundane ego derives from the psychological self-apperception, conceived 
as a type of self-objecti ﬁ cation. The second conception springs from re ﬂ ection 
upon the pure apprehending consciousness, in which the aforementioned self-
objecti ﬁ cation takes shape. According to the second conception, the mundane 
ego is no longer conceived as a naïve ego; it is rather an ego that  recognizes 
itself as a constituted ego . 
 Of what signi ﬁ cance is such a conception for our understanding of the mundane 
ego? With this question in mind, consider the following passage from Nietzsche’s 
 Also sprach Zarathustra . In the section “On Redemption,” Zarathustra  ﬁ nds himself 
in a crowd of cripples and beggars. He is confronted by a hunchback who wonders 
whether Zarathustra could cure the blind, make the lame walk again, and take the 
hump away from the hunchback. Zarathustra initially responds by saying that “if 
one takes the hump away from the hunchback, one also takes away his spirit,” 
thereby suggesting that the  ﬁ nite life is the only life that is given. Yet realizing that 
such an assertion directly leads to nihilistic consequences, Zarathustra supplements 
 38  This paradox can also be found in  Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie —a lecture course 
Husserl delivered in 1910–1911 (See Hua XIII, 174). For the English translation, see Edmund 
Husserl,  The Basic Problems of Phenomenology , trans. I. Farin and J. Hart (Dordrecht: Springer, 
2006). In many regards,  Ideen I is based on these lectures. For another illustration of this paradox, 
see also  Erste Philosophie II (Hua VIII, 71). Husserl’s best-known exposition of this paradox can 
be found in  The Crisis (Hua VI), §53. 
410
S. Geniusas
his initial response with the following observation: “to redeem that which has passed 
away and to re-create all ‘It was’ into a ‘Thus I willed it!’—that alone should I call 
redemption.” 39 
 The differences between Nietzsche’s doctrine of the eternal return and Husserl’s 
notion of self-constitution notwithstanding, I would suggest that the second notion of 
the mundane ego in Husserl’s phenomenology arises out of a similar philosophical 
gesture. By insisting that the mundane ego is itself an accomplishment of subjectivity, 
Husserl suggests that  to recreate all facticity as a transcendental accomplishment—
that alone is a meaningful philosophical response to self-estrangement . Setting any 
naturalistic interpretation of self-constitution aside, one can speak of facticity as 
one’s own accomplishment in that facticity is a sense-structure ( Gebilde ) that is 
brought about ( gebildet ) by subjectivity. 
 To render my reference to Zarathustra’s concept of redemption more  determinate, 
I would like to offer a rather free interpretation of Husserl’s hypothesis of the anni-
hilation of the world. I see within this hypothesis rich and intriguing resources to 
rethink the possibility of a number of experiences, with which all of us are 
familiar. 
 In Praise of the “Annihilation of the World” 
 What is this world that is allegedly capable of being annihilated? One could 
begin by saying that the world is the  spatio-temporal extension within which each 
and every object  ﬁ nds its place. Yet such a notion of the world would remain too 
restrictive. The world also embraces objects that have taken on  value characteristics . 
Moreover, the world is also a  practical horizon , which incorporates not only  inani-
mate objects  but also  animate beings . Consciousness of the world as horizon is 
consciousness of the unanimity of experience, which embraces not only actual, but 
also potential objects of experiences. Yet arguably, consciousness is capable of 
intending phenomena that escape the boundaries of the unanimous world-horizon. 
I would like to turn to three different types of common experiences, which are 
possible only on the basis of the annihilation of the world. 
 Consider  dreamless sleep and  fainting . For them to be possible, consciousness 
must be capable of keeping the world-horizon in suspense; consciousness must 
be capable of neutralizing the world-horizon. In dreamless sleep and fainting, 
consciousness asserts its own independence from the world, it discharges itself 
from the pregiven horizon of sense; in short, it brings the world to ruin. Yet this 
annihilation of the world comes at a hefty price: the suspension of the world-horizon 
here amounts to the collapse of any sense in general. Dreamless sleep and fainting 
 39  Also sprach Zarathustra , in Friedrich Nietzsche,  Gesammelte Werke (Gondrom Verlag, 2005), 
696. For the English translation, see Friedrich Nietzsche,  Thus Spoke Zarathustra , trans. by 
Graham Parkes (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2005). 
411
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
are the most radical forms of the world’s annihilation, which one could liken to 
 transcendental escapism : by bring the world to annihilation, consciousness 
asserts its own independence. Yet this independency is empty; in the most direct 
way, it is “the night in which all cows are black.” 
 Is the price to be paid for the annihilation of the world always so high? Let us 
brie ﬂ y turn to  dreams  and  daydreaming . As seen from the transcendental standpoint, 
these experiences attest to the possibility of keeping the world-horizon in suspense, 
yet without sacri ﬁ cing the appearance of meaningful sense-unities. In dreams and 
daydreaming, appearances are still given to consciousness and they still form uni ﬁ ed 
wholes. Yet what is given in these experiences is completely cut off from the 
world-horizon, which means that I can face the objects of my dreams only insofar 
as I annihilate the world-horizon. 
 This type of the annihilation of the world also calls for signi ﬁ cant sacri ﬁ ces: 
phenomena given in dreams and daydreaming are stamped by the mark of irreality. 
These phenomena lack the solidity of real objects, they lack the density and massive 
presence characteristic of those objects that appear within the world-horizon. One 
could therefore characterize dreams and daydreaming as types of the annihilation of 
the world that culminate in  transcendental irrealism . 
 Must the annihilation of the world always terminate either in transcendental 
escapism or transcendental irrealism? With this question in mind, consider the third 
group of common experiences that fall under the heading of phantasy and imagination. 
These experiences, whether they take the form of a physical image or a pure phantasy, 
whether they are personal, social or cultural, also belong to the group of common 
experiences, which are possible on the basis of the annihilation of the world. I can 
see the image as an image only insofar as I no longer see a perceptual object. In his 
early works on imagination, Jean-Paul Sartre has addressed these structural gaps 
between the imaginative and the perceptual attitudes most forcefully. 40 Between the 
perceptual and the imaginative attitudes I can only choose, between their respective 
“worlds” I can only alternate, which further means that the “world” of imagination 
arises only when the actual world is brought to ruin. This radical gap that separates 
the actual world from imagination is just as strong in the case of pure phantasy. 
 In the present context, I want to emphasize those aspects of imagination that 
were suppressed in Sartre’s early analysis. Imagination has the means to trespass the 
shortcomings of transcendental escapism and transcendental irrealism. Although 
the objects of imagination are irreal,  imagination has the means to draw from the 
resources of irreality the building blocks of a novel world-constitution . My capacity 
to envision a different world derives from my capacity to put the actual world in 
suspense. The paradox of imagination is that by bringing the actual world to annihi-
lation, imagination generates new dimensions of the world-horizon. There is a tacit 
 40  See Jean-Paul Sartre,  L’Imagination (Paris: Alcan, 1936);  Imagination: A Psychological Critique , 
trans. F. William (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1962) and especially  L’Imaginaire: 
psychologie phénoménologique de l’imagination ;  The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology 
of the Imagination , trans. J. Webber (London: Routledge, 2006). 
412
S. Geniusas
 utopian element inscribed in each imaginative act, even though clearly, not each of 
these acts brings out its full constitutive force. 
 The common experiences I have just addressed call for a more elaborate 
examination. In the present context, my task is not to subject phenomena under 
scrutiny to an exhaustive analysis but only to suggest that Husserl’s notorious 
hypothesis of the annihilation of the world provides novel resources to rethink 
their possibility. Such an inquiry leads to the realization that  our facticity is such 
that we can always escape it . What is more, we escape facticity not only by falling 
into transcendental escapism or taking refuge in irreality. The distance from the 
world that is inscribed in the paradox of subjectivity is exactly what enables 
subjectivity to reconstitute the world; and arguably, the power of imagination 
enables us to do just that. 
 But if the world itself can undergo continuous modi ﬁ cations and transformations 
of sense, then arguably the natural world in which we always already  ﬁ nd ourselves 
is itself a symbolic structure of constitutive accomplishments. This is precisely the 
way in which Zarathustra’s concept of redemption can be of help in understanding 
the relation between the mundane and transcendental egos. We live in the world of 
man-made objects, which for the most part we subject to functional use. Usually we 
assume that this human world has an unchangeable natural character; and when we 
resist this assumption, we do so by turning to the sciences and their promise, as 
Descartes would have it, to take the clothes off the cultural worlds and to consider 
the universe in its naked objectivity. To recreate all “it was” into “thus I willed it” 
would allow one to resist both alternatives; it would amount to the possibility of 
clarifying the meaning of the world’s pregivenness by tracing the constitutive 
accomplishments that render this world possible, meaningful, and signi ﬁ cant. 
 The Paradox of Re ﬂ ection 
 In place of a conclusion, I would like to recapitulate the path I have followed by 
turning from Husserl’s texts to descriptive eidetics. Such an “eidetic recapitulation” 
will generate a new insight: the paradox of subjectivity is not a “ ﬁ nal  ﬁ gure” 
built on the otherwise non-paradoxical structures of re ﬂ ection; rather, this paradox 
itself is rooted in a much more basic enigma, which could be called the  paradox 
of re ﬂ ection . 
 Straightforward experience runs its course by being absorbed in the objects of 
experience. Being immersed in objects that trigger its interest, experience unfolds in 
a state of remarkable self-opaqueness. Even to say that straightforward experience 
is self-forgetful would be to grant experience what it in fact lacks, for we can only 
forget what we once knew. However,  straightforward experience knows nothing of 
the ego . Due to its absorption in the objects of experience, it remains without any 
kind of translucency. 
 Yet straightforward experience is capable of numerous modi ﬁ cations, and re ﬂ ection 
is one of them. Re ﬂ ection interrupts the objectively oriented  ﬂ ow of experience; 
413
24 The Post-War Reception of  Ideen I and Reﬂ ection
it liberates experience from the absorption in the objects of experience;  it provides 
access to the subject of experience . 41 
 Yet curiously enough—and this is what allows one to speak of the paradox of 
re ﬂ ection—as soon as re ﬂ ection renders the ego thematic, it tears the ego apart into 
two poles: the re ﬂ ecting ego and the ego-re ﬂ ected upon. This means that while 
re ﬂ ection is the only access I have to render the ego thematic, as soon as I  ﬁ nd 
myself, I immediately lose myself. Thus the birth of re ﬂ ection, the thematization of 
the ego, distances the ego from itself. Let this be the  ﬁ rst thesis:  re ﬂ ection, our only 
available access to the ego, discovers the ego at the price of splitting it into two—the 
re ﬂ ecting ego and the ego-re ﬂ ected-upon. 
 Of what philosophical signi ﬁ cance is this re ﬂ ective self-distanciation? At the end 
of the  ﬁ rst section, I indicated one possible misunderstanding: this self-distanciation 
is not to be conceived as a reason that grounds a skeptical worry regarding the validity 
of re ﬂ ective insight. Yet even though there are good reasons to dismiss such a 
concern, nonetheless, the spit between the patent and the latent egos remains irre-
movable. The re ﬂ ecting ego recognizes itself in the ego-re ﬂ ected-upon, yet it does 
not sacri ﬁ ce the distance that separates them. Let this be the second thesis:  the ego 
given in re ﬂ ection is a split ego, yet despite this split, it recognizes itself as one and 
the same ego . Thus the ego is given to itself as an identity in difference. 
 To make more sense of such a paradoxical self-givenness, let us ask: how exactly 
is the ego given in re ﬂ ection? The ego-re ﬂ ected-upon is given to the re ﬂ ecting ego 
as a certain  unity of sense . Any unity of sense is a meaning that consciousness 
intends. Moreover, any kind of meaning lends itself to the question of its own 
possibilities. One can therefore ask: what syntheses does the givenness of the patent 
ego presuppose? If the self in re ﬂ ection emerges as a psychological unity of sense, 
then it presupposes temporal syntheses, spatial syntheses, as well as syntheses of 
association. And if one further asks, “who is it that performs these syntheses?” then 
sooner or later one is led to the realization that only one answer is possible: I myself 
am the one who performs the syntheses in question. 42 Thus I myself am the sense 
that I intend; I myself am a synthetic unity of sense that I constitute. Such, then, is 
the third thesis:  I myself am my own accomplishment . 
 Such a blueprint of an eidetic description of the structures of re ﬂ ection allows one 
to say that the split between what Husserl calls the transcendental and the mundane ego 
is rooted in a more basic split between the re ﬂ ecting ego and the ego-re ﬂ ected-upon. 
This means that the paradox of subjectivity, which Husserl has addressed in a number 
of his works, is rooted in the paradox of re ﬂ ection. 
 Yet is this eidetic description of any signi ﬁ cance when it comes to our understanding 
of facticity? With this issue in mind, let us ask: what is the ego? Does this term refer to 
 41  In the present context, I have left pre-re ﬂ ective self-consciousness aside, since at any rate, it does 
not offer a  thematic conception of the ego. For an account of the relation between self-conscious-
ness and re ﬂ ection, see Hermann Asemissen, “Egologische Re ﬂ exion,”  Kant-Studien 50 
(1958/59). 
 42  No other answer is possible, since if one offered an anonymous origin of these syntheses, a new 
question would emerge: how is the ego conscious of this anonymous origin, and so  ad in ﬁ nitum . 
414
S. Geniusas
the mundane ego or the transcendental ego? The three theses I have just singled out 
suggest that this last question is an instance of a false dichotomy. Assuming that the 
answer to this question must be rooted in re ﬂ ection, one would have to say that the ego 
is both a transcendental and a mundane ego.  The transcendental and the mundane egos 
are two moments of the egoic structure of experience . But if so, then a patient and 
detailed description of those syntheses which enable the givenness of the mundane ego 
would in a signi ﬁ cant way enrich our conception of facticity. The self-distanciation that 
underlies the givenness of the mundane ego can be covered up, but it cannot be 
eliminated.  
415
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_25, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Introduction 
 Husserl’s 1913  Ideen I had a cold reception and was marked since its publication by 
a general misunderstanding that distanced him from generations of phenomenologists. 
Some critical reviews of  Ideen I are examined here (Heidegger, Ricoeur, Boehm) 
and brie ﬂ y confronted against the background of manuscripts that remained 
unpublished during several decades. On this basis, the attempt is made to show that 
 Ideen I ’s basic intuitions—in spite of its undeniably misleading terminology—still 
prove to be relevant for the practice of phenomenology. 
 Short Historical Survey 
 The following contribution deals with what we believe affected the continuing 
impact of  Ideen I 1 on the “practice of phenomenology” during most of the twentieth 
century, both in Continental Europe and world-wide, following the steps of 
Heidegger’s early 1925 critical assessment of that text. 2 The disavowal of Husserl’s 
 R. R. P.  Lerner (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Ponti ﬁ cal Catholic University of Peru ,  Lima ,  Peru 
e-mail:  rosemarylerner@mac.com 
 Chapter 25 
 Ideen I Confronting Its Critics 
 Rosemary  R. P.  Lerner  
 1  Edmund Husserl,  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy , First Book  General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology , trans. F. Kersten 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1983). We will also quote from the German of ﬁ cial edition, 
 Husserliana: Edmund Husserl-Gesammelte Werke in which case  Ideen I is Hua III. 
 2  Martin Heidegger,  Prolegomena zur Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs, Gesamtausgabe, vol. 20 
(Frankfurt a. M.: Vittorio Klostermann, 1979), henceforth  GA 20 ;  History of the Concept of Time, 
Prolegomena , trans. T. Kisiel (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985), henceforth  HCT. 
416
R.R.P. Lerner
“transcendental phenomenology” by the most relevant philosophical debates for 
most of the last century under the aegis of Heidegger’s in ﬂ uence was  ﬁ rst made 
public in 1929 with Georg Misch’s  Lebensphilosophie und Phänomenologie , 3 
spread world-wide before and after the Second World War, and later radicalized by 
the renowned postmodern deconstructionist movement. Jacques Taminiaux remarks 
that “for phenomenological reasons,” important thinkers of the Continental Tradition 
“judged it necessary to explain themselves with Heidegger.” 4 This is the case already 
with Husserl’s former student and later assistant Ludwig Landgrebe. 5 Already before 
the Second World War, the genetic and generative elements that were recognized in 
Husserl’s later works were even interpreted as fragmentary and not really integrated 
with the methodological program of  Ideen I ’s transcendental phenomenology. 6 
In that respect, Taminiaux observed that for Merleau-Ponty “to interpret Husserl’s 
evolution means to underscore the contrast between the clear program of transcendental 
phenomenology and the obscure and in ﬁ nite patience of the manuscripts and to 
recognize in them an at least tacit rupture with the logicism of the philosophy of 
essences and the growing awareness that the phenomena resist any return to the 
classical effort at intellectual adequation.” 7 
 It is symptomatic that Paul Ricoeur’s 1950 introduction to his French translation 
of  Ideen I 8 and Rudolf Boehm’s 1959 paper on the “ambiguities” of Husserl’s concepts 
of immanence and transcendence 9 both return to the same passages of  Ideen I ’s 
Second Part interpreted by Heidegger, consolidating a rapidly widespread critical 
view of Husserl’s notion of immanence as fostering a “solipsistic idealism.” 
This post-war reading was radicalized during the 1960s and 1970s especially with 
French structuralism and postmodern deconstructionism, spurred on by Jacques 
 3  Georg Misch,  Lebensphilosophie und Phänomenologie-Eine Auseinandersetzung der 
Dilthey’schen Richtung mit Heidegger und Husserl (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1929). 
 4  Jacques Taminiaux,  Sillages phénoménologiques, Auditeurs et lecteurs de Heidegger (Bruxelles: 
Éditions Ousia, 2002), 7. 
 5  Ludwig Landgrebe,  Der Weg der Phänomenologie. Das Problem einer ursprünglichen Erfahrung 
(Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus Gerd Mohn, 1963). See especially Chapter I, §3, where he 
comments on Heidegger’s  Sein und Zeit critiques of Husserl’s phenomenological method (the 
reduction and constitutive analyses), in favor of radicalizing the “natural concept of the world” 
manifest to an “originary experience.” 
 6  Cf. ibid., Chapter VIII, entitled “Husserl and his withdrawal from Cartesianism.” 
 7  Jacques Taminiaux,  Dialectic and Difference: Finitude in Modern Thought , ed. and trans. R. Crease 
and J. T. Decker (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press Inc., 1985), 117–18. 
 8  Paul Ricoeur, “Introduction à  Ideen I de E. Husserl par le traducteur,”  Idées directrices pour une 
phénoménologie et une philosophie phénoménologique pures , Tome premier , Introduction générale 
à la phénoménologie pure, trans. P. Ricoeur (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1950), henceforth,  Introd. 
Idées I . See also P. Ricoeur,  Husserl, An Analysis of his Phenomenology , trans. E.G. Ballard and 
L. Embree (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1967), 13–34. 
 9  Rudolf Boehm, “Les ambigüités des concepts husserliens d’ ‘immanence’ et de ‘transcendance,’” 
 Revue philosophique de la France et de l’étranger CXLIX/4 (1959): 481–526. 
417
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
Derrida’s 1967 in ﬂ uential text  La voix et le phénomène , 10 and Gérard Granel’s 1968 
 Le sens du temps et de la perception chez Edmund Husserl . 11 Both refer to Ricoeur’s 
translation and reading of  Ideen I , while Granel acknowledges only Ricoeur and 
Boehm as “authoritative” interpreters. 12 
 Furthermore, both pay allegiance to their Heideggerian in ﬂ uence. Although 
Granel has not been so widely known outside French-speaking countries as Derrida, 
especially in America, he is a representative of a line of interpretation that marked 
the reception of Husserl’s philosophy as a whole. Derrida’s views concerning 
Husserl’s “metaphysics of presence,” stemming from an alleged erroneous notion of 
“ideality” that attempts to ascertain its “presence” in a pure un-mediated and solipsistic 
intuition, whereas the difference and “repetition” of a mediated symbolic  Vorstellung 
is putatively its real source, is well known. 13 Derrida’s interpretation goes from the 
 Logische Untersuchungen , all the way through the  Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie 
des inneren Zeitbewusstseins ,  Ideen I , and “Die Frage nach dem Ursprung der 
Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem.” Husserl’s “living present” in the 
sense of the primacy of “punctuality” and the “actual now” in the context of the latter’s 
time-analyses, and the bearing of this primacy on the phenomenological notion of 
“evidence” and “truth,” puts Husserl at odds—so Derrida—with the only decisive 
concept that could have broken the tradition of the “Greek metaphysics of presence” 
and its inheritance by the “Modern metaphysics of presence as self-consciousness”—“the 
concept of time.” 14 Granel advances a similar critical view on Husserl’s de ﬁ cient 
concept of time and its “ Wesensschau ,” and dedicates extensive parts of his text to a 
critical assessment of  Ideen I , concretely of “The Considerations Fundamental to 
Phenomenology” (Part II) examined previously by the aforementioned texts of 
Heidegger, Ricoeur, and Boehm. 15 
 Our concern here is not directed to the French and European reception of the 
three books of  Ideen after the Second World War, but rather to a certain reading of 
the 1913 text—originated in Heidegger’s interpretation—that has not only contributed 
to darken and even marginalize its methodological proposal but also supported a 
widespread critical interpretation of transcendental phenomenology. 16 Even 
philosophers who putatively share a community of ideas and themes with their 
 10  Jacques Derrida,  La voix et le phénomène ,  Introduction au problème du signe dans la phénomé-
nologie de Husserl (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1967);  “Speech and Phenomena” and 
Other Essays on Husserl’s Theory of Signs , trans. David B. Allison (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1973). 
 11  Gérard Granel,  Le sens du temps et de la perception chez E. Husserl (Paris: Gallimard, 1968). 
 12  See his controversial “Note on the question of Bibliography,”  op. cit., 271. 
 13  Jacques Derrida,  op. cit ., 55 ff. 
 14  Ibid., 70. 
 15  Gérard Granel,  op. cit ., 72–180, 240–47,  passim. 
 16  I not only refer, following R. Wolin, to  Heidegger’s Children :  Hannah Arendt, Karl Löwith, Hans 
Jonas, and Herbert Marcuse (California: University Presses of California, 2003), but also to 
hermeneutic and existential phenomenologists, all the way to Husserl’s deconstructivist, analytic, 
and social critical interpreters. 
418
R.R.P. Lerner
master’s phenomenology have rejected the alleged Cartesian “philosophy of 
subjectivity.” 17 They surprisingly converge in characterizing Husserl’s philosophy 
as an un-historical idealism or essentialism; an epigonic form of solipsism and 
un-worldly egology established by the  epochē and reduction that consecrates the 
 ego ’s self-transparency  versus the unconsciousness’s or “false consciousness’s” 
opacity, leading to the failure of its intersubjectivity theory; a logocentric, scientistic, 
intellectualistic, and foundationalist philosophy that is unable to overcome the 
prejudices of modern philosophy; a metaphysics of presence that fails in its analyses 
of temporality; a centripetal philosophy of an autarchic, self-suf ﬁ cient, and self-
contained immanence that excludes and reduces all dependency regarding a 
centrifugal, decentralized, and surplus transcendence; in sum, a philosophy of  identity 
(of sameness, ipseity, or autonomy) that by means of an objectifying and constitutive 
intentionality attempts to subjugate and overcome all  difference (otherness, alterity, 
or heteronomy), among other things. 18 
 Husserl himself introduces endless critical commentaries, amendments, and 
additions to his three exemplars of  Ideen I from 1913 to approximately 1929. 19 His 
own later characterization of  Ideen I ’s reduction as a “Cartesian way” 20 paved the 
way for the critical readings proposed by his own disciples, starting with Heidegger’s, 
followed by Ricoeur’s, and Boehm’s among others. Their assessment concerning 
the ambiguities of  Ideen I ’s notions of  immanence  and  transcendence will be 
reevaluated with the methodological insights of “ ﬁ rst philosophy,” at this “static 
stage” of development. We believe that Husserl’s genetic and generative analyses  do 
not contradict his initial transcendental project, focused on “active  constitution ” or 
“ genesis .” Although  Ideen I is silent with regard to the “passive  genesis ” later developed 
by “genetic phenomenology,” and in that sense — as Bruzina contends in this 
collection—it “does not take us there yet,” it offers powerful tools for the practice 
 17  They demand “not to use the Cartesian-Husserlian philosophy of subjectivity that cannot provide 
as foundation but suspicious evidences, since they are  ﬁ nally solipsistic, isolated.” Jean-François 
Lyotard, “Argumentation et présentation: La crise des fondements,”  Encyclopédie Philosophique 
Universelle , vol. I,  L’Univers Philosophique, ed. A. Jacob (Paris: PUF, 1989), 740. Donn Welton, 
 The Other Husserl. The Horizons of Transcendental Phenomenology , (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 2000), 1, adds that the contrast between the interpretation of analytic philosophers 
seriously interested in Husserl and the overt disavowal of the latter’s work by deconstructionist 
thinkers is surprising. David Carr remarks that most of these Continental critics seem to ignore the 
difference between the  metaphysical and  transcendental sources of the distinction between an 
empirical and a transcendental subjectivity, expressed in the “paradox of human subjectivity” of 
being simultaneously “an object  in the world and a subject  for the world.” See  The Paradox of 
Subjectivity. The Self in the Transcendental Tradition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 
especially 1–4. 
 18  In this sense, Richard J. Bernstein comments that Husserl is one of those philosophers that suffer 
from “Cartesian anxiety.” See his  Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: Science, Hermeneutics, and 
Praxis (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983), 16–20. 
 19  See Karl Schuhmann’s “Introduction,”  Hua III/1, xli–lvi. 
 20  Hua VII, lecture 46, 126  passim. 
419
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
of phenomenology, further enhanced when seen against the background of books II 
and III and the general scope of Husserl’s initial project. 21 
 Our imaginary confrontation of  Ideen I  with some of its conspicuous “critics” 
aims to highlight the possibility of its continuing relevance for the practice of 
phenomenology. 
 Eidetics and the Being of Consciousness 
 Heidegger’s 1925 Marburg lecture is a remarkable piece for two fundamental reasons. 
First, 22 because it brilliantly expounds and interprets the main phenomenological 
theses 23 that “fascinated” him since his  ﬁ rst encounter with Husserl’s 1900–1901 
 Logische Untersuchungen. 24 Second, because its “Main Part” 25 may be considered a 
“purely phenomenological draft” of his 1927  Sein und Zeit. 26 The “Preliminary 
Part” contains a critical third chapter whereby an ample section develops an “immanent 
critique” of  Ideen I ’s transcendental phenomenology. We will only refer to some 
aspects of this section, where Heidegger examines the second chapter of  Ideen I ’s 
second part (“The Considerations Fundamental to Phenomenology”). 27 He argues 
that the original  ﬁ eld of Husserlian phenomenological analyses is an “independent” 
region of real being, 28 emulating Cartesian dualism. Intentionality is “ ﬁ rst given” in 
 21  The massive publication of Husserl’s unpublished manuscripts has changed the scope of the 
traditional interpretation of transcendental phenomenology.  Ideen I , as other published works, is 
viewed as a mere “condensation” of a thought-process that continues to broaden and reformulate 
itself, from a  static-descriptive dimension to a  genetic-explanatory one, from 1915–17 onwards. 
See Bernet, R., I. Kern and E. Marbach,  Edmund Husserl. Darstellung seines Denkens (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner Verlag, 1989), 1. 
 22  This he undertakes in its  ﬁ rst and preparatory extensive part (“The sense and task of phenomeno-
logical research”). See  GA 20 , 13–182;  HCT , 11–131. 
 23  These are: intentionality ( GA 20 , 34–63;  HCT , 27–47), categorial intuition (Ibid., 63–99; Ibid., 
47–72), and “the original sense of the  apriori ” (Ibid., 99–103; Ibid., 72–75). He also comments the 
main “principle of phenomenology” (in relation to the maxim “to the matters themselves” and to 
the understanding of phenomenology as an “analytic description of intentionality in its  apriori ”) 
(Ibid., 103–110; Ibid., 75–80), and clari ﬁ es “the name ‘phenomenology’” through the analysis of 
its both components:  f a i n ό m e n o n and  l ό g o V  (Ibid., 110–22; Ibid., 81–89). He deals again with 
this latter analysis and improves it in  Sein und Zeit , so I will not refer to it here. 
 24  Martin Heidegger, “Mein Weg in die Phänomenologie,”  Zur Sache des Denkens (Tübingen: Max 
Niemeyer, 1969), 82. 
 25  “Analysis of the Phenomenon of Time and Derivation of the Concept of Time,”  GA 20, 183–442; 
 HCT, 133–320. 
 26  Martin Heidegger,  Sein und Zeit (Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, 1972), henceforth,  SZ. 
 27  “Consciousness and Natural Actuality,”  Ideen I , §§33–46, 63–104 ( Hua XIX/1, 66–99). 
 28  GA 20 , 129–39;  HCT, 94–101. 
420
R.R.P. Lerner
the “ natural attitude ” whence emerges the “new scienti ﬁ c  ﬁ eld” of “ pure lived 
experiences” and of “ pure consciousness with its pure correlates. ” 29 Heidegger 
believes that the phenomenological reduction is already introduced in §39, and 
although for Husserl both regions are articulated in the double sense of the 
psychophysical unity and of the intentional relation, there remains an “abyss of 
meaning” between immanence and transcendence. Thus Heidegger asks: “how can it 
still be said that consciousness has … an essence particular to it?” 30  The sense of 
the  ἐ p o c ή in the former chapter, had “the sole function of making the entity present 
in regard to its being.” Now, there are two reductions:  transcendental reduction 
(securing the sphere of acts and their objects), 31 and  eidetic reduction. Hence, the 
eidetic (“though by no means exhaustive”) analyses 32 of this chapter, starting from 
§39,  develop within the pure transcendental-phenomenological sphere. Consciousness 
in these analyses is “no longer concrete and individual.” 33 Furthermore, §§44– 46 
oppose the “merely phenomenal being of something transcendent” to the 
“absolute being of something immanent” based on two radically different types of 
intuition: “immanent” perception that constitutes a sphere of “absolute positing,” 
and “transcendent” perception that preserves the possibility of the non-being of 
the perceived. Since §46 asserts that those considerations  ﬁ nally “do justice” “to a 
core of Descartes’  Meditations (directed to entirely different ends),” 34 he concludes 
that Husserl  ontologically characterizes the region of consciousness as a  res. 35 
 But, what is the sense of  absolute being , and of “this absolute region of 
consciousness”? This  question is the most  fundamental and “must precede any 
phenomenological deliberation.” 36 Accordingly, Heidegger examines four Husserlian 
 determinations of consciousness’s  being . 
 Since  immanence is a “relation of real inclusion” between “what is re ﬂ ected and 
re ﬂ ection,” Heidegger concludes that the  ﬁ rst determination of the  being of con-
sciousness as “immanent” has failed. According to the  second determination , immanent 
consciousness is pure and simple  absolute being, due to the absolute  givenness of 
lived experiences in the former sense of a “real inclusion” between re ﬂ ection and 
something re ﬂ ected upon. However, according to §49’s (third chapter)  third 
determination , 37  it is  absolute in a different sense, for  nulla re indiget ad existendum . 
This follows Descartes’ de ﬁ nition of “substance” for “in principle the possibility 
 29  Ideen I, Hua  III/1, §33 . 
 30  See ibid., §39, “Consciousness and Natural Actuality. The ‘Naïve’ Human Being’s Conception.” 
 GA 20 , 134–35;  HCT, 98. 
 31  Loc. cit.; Ibid., 100. 
 32  Ideen I , 65;  Hua III/1, 68. 
 33  GA 20 , 137;  loc. cit. 
 34  Ideas I, 104;  Hua III/1, 99. 
 35  Ibid., 124–27; ibid., 116–18. 
 36  GA 20 , 140–42;  HCT, 102. 
 37  Entitled “The Region of Pure Consciousness.” 
421
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
exists that consciousness itself is ‘not affected in its own existence’ by an ‘annihila-
tion of the world of things.’” 38 Consciousness “is the presupposition of being,” only 
“on the basis of which reality can manifest itself at all.” 39 “Constituting being is 
absolute” for “in constituting itself, it constitutes every possible reality” as a wholly 
autarchic independent being. Hence, “consciousness is the …  apriori in Descartes and 
Kant’s sense,” the priority of subjectivity regarding objectivity. Yet this third deter-
mination “does not determine  the entity itself in its being.” 40 Finally, according to 
the  fourth determination , if consciousness is  absolute being because its givenness 
does not require any reality, it is “pure being,” “pure essence,” the “ideal being” of lived 
experiences. Since it is an  ideal ,  not a real being, Husserl disregards consciousness’s 
“concrete individuation and its tie to a living being.” 41 
 Consequently, none of the four determinations of consciousness are drawn from 
intentional  being  itself. Furthermore, the notions “apprehended being,” “given 
being,” “constituting being,” and “ideating being” are “perspectives … alien to con-
sciousness.” Husserl’s only interest is consciousness as the  ﬁ eld of an “ absolute 
science .” For Heidegger “the genuine determination of the being of lived experience” 
is found in the “natural attitude,” where one may anticipate the being of that concrete 
entity, man, whose determinations are consciousness and reason. 42 
 For Husserl, “The sense of the reduction,” both “transcendental and eidetic,” is 
rather “to make no use  of the reality of the intentional,” 43 and to disregard “any 
particular individuation of lived experiences. It disregards the fact that they are mine 
or those of any other individual human being and regards them only in their  what. ” 
It does not regard “their being  an act as such.” 44 Intentional being is detached from 
the real consciousness of humans existing factually. The question of existence is thus 
lost with both types of reduction. But “if there were an entity  whose what is precisely 
to be and nothing but to be , then this ideative regard of such an entity would be the 
most fundamental of misunderstandings,” and “this misunderstanding is prevalent 
in phenomenology.” 45 Paradoxically, phenomenology is moved by the interest in 
providing a scienti ﬁ c basis  to reality. 
 Hence, in Husserl’s phenomenology “ the question of the being of the intentional 
is left undiscussed ,” 46 and the task of phenomenological reduction is to demarcate 
these two spheres, without interrogating their being, 47 so that: “ On the one hand, the 
 38  Ibid., 143–44, 104–105. 
 39  Ibid., 144, 105. 
 40  Ibid., 145;  loc. cit . 
 41  Ibid., 146, 106. 
 42  Ibid., 148, 107. 
 43  Ibid., 150–51, 109. 
 44  Ibid., 151;  loc. cit. 
 45  Ibid., 152, 110. 
 46  Ibid., 157, 113. 
 47  Ibid., 158; ibid., 114. 
422
R.R.P. Lerner
question of the being of this speci ﬁ c entity ,  of the acts ,  is neglected; on the other, we 
have the neglect of the question of the sense of being itself .” 48 The last 30 pages of 
Heidegger’s 1925 Lecture course’s Preliminary Part all deal with this question, 
concluding that the neglect of the question of being as such and of intentional being 
is due to the “fallenness of  Dasein itself.” 49 
 The Tension Between Intuition and Constitution 
 Paul Ricoeur avows that the “Introduction” to his 1950 French version of  Ideen I 50 
is very modest, for by then the enormous mass of posthumous manuscripts prevents 
him from giving a “radical and global account of Husserl’s work.” 51 
 He searches for the keys to his interpretation in later texts belonging to the genetic 
period, such as  Formale und transzendentale Logik , and  Cartesianische 
Meditationen , 52 or in Eugen Fink’s 1933 text, “The Phenomenological Philosophy 
of Edmund Husserl and Contemporary Criticism.” 53 
 Based on Fink, Ricoeur correctly remarks that after introducing the  ἐ p o c ή in 
Part Two’s  ﬁ rst chapter, Husserl sets it aside and  returns , in the second chapter,  to 
the natural attitude.  Hence, against Heidegger, he believes that  all the analyses here 
belong to a “phenomenological or intentional psychology” 54 and that  the intentionality 
described is not yet transcendental. 55 Since the reduction is interpreted in a Cartesian, 
 48  Loc. cit. ; ibid., 115. 
 49  See ibid., 160–82, 115–31. 
 50  Ricoeur’s commentary oscillates between an insightful and keen interpretation and certain 
surprising doubts concerning the real purpose of Husserl’s work. Regarding  Ideen I’ s  ﬁ rst part, 
“Essence and Eidetic Cognition,” he even states that it “initiates with a very dif ﬁ cult chapter of 
logic that the reader may provisionally omit.” ( Introd. Idées I , xiv), seemingly ignoring Husserl’s 
purpose to demarcate a much wider  ﬁ eld of possible objectivities than those of the natural 
world—denied by Naturalism and even neo-Kantianism—also purported to furnish a “guideline” 
to a retrospective phenomenological inquiry. Nonetheless, Ricoeur adds that this part’s aim “is to 
show that it is possible to build a non-empirical but eidetic … ‘region’ of consciousness (as opposed 
to the ‘region’ nature);” and that “phenomenology … will rise to a point of the subject that will be 
constitutive regarding those same sciences that have given it its  ﬁ rst statute.” (Ibid., xiv–xv). 
 51  Introd.  Idées I , xi. 
 52  See Edmund Husserl,  Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. D. Cairns (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1978), henceforth  FTL ( Hua XVII). See also  Cartesian Meditations, trans. D. Cairns (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1960), henceforth  MC ( Hua I). 
 53  Eugen Fink, “The Phenomenological Philosophy of Edmund Husserl and Contemporary 
Criticism,”  The Phenomenology of Husserl, Selected Critical Readings, ed. and trans. R.O. Elveton 
(Edmonds, WA: Noesis Press Ltd., 2000), 70–139. 
 54  Coinciding with Husserl’s marginal notations to §34 in  Ideas I’ s A and D exemplars ( Hua III/2, 
487). 
 55  Introd.  Idées I , xv. 
423
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
“dangerous” way, seeming to “extract something,” and only allowing one “to remain 
a psychological consciousness,  not a transcendental subject ,” 56 it is a “preparatory” 
and “dispensable” chapter. 57 However, for Ricoeur not even the third chapter—where 
reality is said to “announce” itself to consciousness as a “unity of a sense” through 
a “diversity of convergent ‘adumbrations’”—clearly posits the transcendental 
dimension either, although “it is oriented toward the idea of reduction and 
constitution.” 58 
 The correct comprehension of the transcendental reduction, whereby the “general 
thesis of the natural attitude” is globally affected, is only given in the context of the 
 ﬁ rst chapter of this part. The “world thesis” is there revealed as product of a  constitution. 
But the rest of Part Two leaves the “reduction dangerously associated to the idea of 
the destruction of the world and the idea of the relativity of the world and the 
absolute of consciousness.” 59 
 The tension between constitution and intuition returns in the rest of Ricoeur’s 
commentary. Phenomenology is a philosophy of  seeing , “that will emerge from 
phenomenological reduction in all of its glory.” 60 Intuition is  originally giving , so 
that the “world constitution is not a formal legislation but the givenness of seeing 
itself by the transcendental subject.” 61 In the natural attitude we  see without being 
aware that we  bestow sense. Only the phenomenological attitude reveals the 
transcendental I as the key of constitution. Intentionality, seen by the transcendental 
I, is a  constitution . 62 
 Thus, the “dif ﬁ culties of an integral interpretation of  Ideen I ” amount to the 
following: “Every transcendental phenomenology is suspended in this double 
possibility: to ascertain, on one hand, the primacy of intuition over every construction; 
on the other, to allow the point of view of transcendental constitution to triumph 
over the naiveté of natural man. In his  Epilogue to the  Ideen …, Husserl underscores 
the conjunction of both demands.” 63 “Transcendental idealism”—a term that does not 
appear in  Ideen I but does in unedited manuscripts of that period—expresses the 
dif ﬁ culty of this double demand. This idealism is such that “it does not rebuke intuition 
but founds it.” 64 It does not deal with the Kantian problem, but with the question of 
the “world’s origin”—as Fink pointed out—an incomprehensible question before 
 56  Introd.  Idées I , xv. 
 57  Husserl remarks at the end of §46: “In a preliminary way we draw our consequences within the 
bounds of a restricted application” ( Ideas I, 104;  Hua III/1, 99). 
 58  Ibid., xvi–xvii. 
 59  Ibid., xix. 
 60  Ibid., xvii–xviii. 
 61  Ibid., xix–xx. 
 62  In ﬂ uenced by Fink, Ricoeur believes that even Part III (“Methods and Problems of Pure 
Phenomenology”)—that deals with the constitutional problems—is situated “between an intentional 
psychology and a transcendental … phenomenology” (ibid., xxv). 
 63  Loc. cit. 
 64  Ibid., xxvi–xxvii. 
424
R.R.P. Lerner
executing the reduction. Thus the Cartesian and Kantian reasons brandished  before 
the reduction’s execution are equivocal. Furthermore, “… the transcendental subject 
is absolutely not absent of this world; on the contrary, it is its foundation …. Every 
new dimension of the I is a new dimension of the world. In this sense, intentionality 
is still the common theme of intentional psychology and phenomenological 
philosophy. But each time that the attempt is made to limit the reduction … to the 
psychological consciousness, the sense of the I is reduced to a simple … mental 
for-itself that leaves outside the in-itself. … On the contrary, the phenomenological 
method consists in doing the exegesis of the  ego taking the world-phenomenon as 
guideline.” 65 
 Be all this as it may, Ricoeur concludes that: “Maybe … the ultimate sense of 
phenomenology may not be approached except by de ﬁ nitely equivocal attempts.” 66 
 The Ambiguities of Immanence and Transcendence 
 Boehm, in his long 1959 work, 67 draws attention to the different meaning levels that 
the terms  immanence and  transcendence have for Husserl, intertwined in an ambiguous 
way precisely in the second chapter of “The Considerations Fundamental to 
Phenomenology.” 
 He deems that there is no ambiguity in the use of said notions in the Fifth of the 
1901  Logische Untersuchungen . Phenomenological immanence is there reduced to 
the “descriptive,” “real” ( reellen ) contents of lived experiences, whereas the  real 
intentional object in the sense of the worldly thing is absolutely transcendent. 68 Thus 
the “phenomenological I” “is reduced to effective data.” 
 The ambiguity  ﬁ rst begins with the 1907  ﬁ ve lectures on  Die Idee der 
Phänomenologie . 69 The abstract of “The Train of Thoughts in the Lectures” divides 
these in three levels. To the “ ﬁ rst step in the phenomenological consideration” (in 
the second lecture) corresponds the  ﬁ rst sense of immanence and transcendence—the 
same as in 1901—namely, a distinction between two orders of  realities. To the “second 
level” (in lectures three and four) corresponds a  second sense , “authentically 
phenomenological,” rendered possible by the  phenomenological reduction. 
Understood as a “merely intuitive re ﬂ ection” the reduction renders an “absolute 
givenness that no longer offers anything transcendent,” but rather “the immanent 
essence” of psychic phenomena. 70 The new  pure phenomenological immanence is 
 65  Ibid., xxix–xxx. 
 66  Ibid., xxxviii. 
 67  See footnote 9. 
 68  Boehm falsely assumes that “real immanence” is reduced in that work to “ Stoff , or sensations.” 
See  Hua XIX/1, §45, A 470/B 1 506. 
 69  See Edmund Husserl,  The Idea of Phenomenology ( Edmund Husserl. Collected Works , vol. VIII), 
trans. L. Hardy (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999), henceforth  CW VIII ( Hua II).  
 70  Ibid., 33–34;  Hua II, 44–45. 
425
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
the  reduced  psychic phenomenon, its  essence .  Transcendent is everything pertaining 
to objective time; lived-experiences as empirical facts belonging to the natural science 
 psychology  are also  transcendent . Finally, a “third level” of phenomenological 
meditation ( ﬁ fth lecture) studies the problems of “phenomenological constitution.” 
 In the controversial second chapter of  Ideen I’s  Part Two, several senses of 
immanence and transcendence appear, none of which properly coincides with the 
second sense of  Die Idee der Phänomenologie. Yet the  ﬁ rst sense 71  in both texts 
coincides with the  Logische Untersuchungen , whereby  immanent is all that per-
tains to the  ﬂ ow of lived-experiences: the sensuous  hylē plus the  cogitationes ’ 
intentional  morphē , in sum, the total “really inherent composition” of the  ﬂ ow of 
consciousness ( noesis  in a wide sense). 72  Rather,  transcendent are the intentional 
objects that do not belong to the same  ﬂ ow of experience ( i.e ., those of other 
subjects, ideal or physical objects, and cultural entities). 73 “Acts” directed to 
immanence and transcendence, are thus distinguished. Now, the  second sense 
restricts the  ﬁ rst sense, 74 for only the object of an “immanent  perception ,” being 
“really included” in the act, is immanent 75 ; whereas “the remembered remember-
ing that occurred yesterday does not belong to the present remembering as a really 
inherent component of its concrete unity.” 76 Hence, “transcendent” here are not 
only real physical objects, other  egos , and ideal essences, but also objects of every 
other act formerly considered “immanently oriented.” These ambiguities “seem 
to degenerate … in a total confusion,” 77 when a  third sense of these terms appears 
in §42, 78 based on an “essentially necessary difference between the modes of intu-
ition,” yet associated to the  ﬁ rst, real distinction. The “ really immanent” (every 
lived-experience) 79 is “absolutely” given whereas every other mode of presence is 
“really transcendent.” 80  Thus, this  third sense  of the terms in  Ideen I does not 
wholly coincide with the second sense of  Die Idee der Phänomenologie , for the 
former develops entirely within “eidetic considerations,” yet  Ideen I’s  §§44 and 
46 refer to immanence as a sphere of “absolute presence.” 81 Hence, this chapter 
“concludes with an ambiguity that brushes misunderstanding and confusion.” 82  
 71  Ibid., §§36, and 38–41. 
 72  Ideas I , §§41 and 97. 
 73  See ibid., §§38 and 41. 
 74  See ibid., §§38, 41, 42 and 46. 
 75  This is the sense of “immanence” that Heidegger considers corresponds to  Ideas I ’s  ﬁ rst 
determination of consciousness. 
 76  Ideas I, §38, 80;  Hua III/1, 79. 
 77  Boehm, R.,  op. cit ., 494–95. 
 78  Ideas I , 89;  Hua III/1, 86. 
 79  Ibid., §42, 91; ibid., 88. 
 80  Ibid., §§44 & 46; Boehm, R.,  op. cit ., 502–503. 
 81  Yet this latter expression stems from a 1922 Appendix.  Ideen I  only uses expressions such as 
“given as absolute” (ibid., 502–503). 
 82  Ibid., 504. 
426
R.R.P. Lerner
 Boehm agrees with Ricoeur that Part II’s second chapter is developed as a 
phenomenological psychology within the natural attitude, 83 but not that it is merely 
“preparatory” 84 —even if its complement is  ﬁ rst given in the next chapter. 85  Thus “the 
considerations fundamental to phenomenology,” despite their “Cartesian  ﬂ air” and 
ambiguities,  are given in Chapter II ’s arguments related to the “essentially necessary 
difference” between the immanent and transcendent “modes of presence.” Hence, 
these analyses are not “dispensable”; rather phenomenological psychology is meant 
to anticipate and “found” “the essential possibility of carrying out the phenomeno-
logical reduction” 86  and the  transcendental distinction between these terms. Reduction 
is  ﬁ rst executed in Chapter III’s §50, whereby “we have not lost anything but rather 
have gained the whole of absolute being which, rightly understood, contains within 
itself, ‘constitutes’ within itself, all worldly transcendencies.” 87 The authentic “absolute” 
is  transcendental  being, whereas Chapter II’s “absolute being,” unable to “contain” 
or “constitute” worldly transcendence, merely opposes it. Disagreeing with Fink and 
Ricoeur, Boehm believes that Part III’s and Part IV’s descriptions of constitution and 
the noetic-noematic structures are also transcendental. They raise the descriptions of 
Part Two’s second chapter to the level of “ pure immanence” (adding the  noema to the 
really inherent composition of lived-experiences). In an epistemological sense, if the 
world did not exist, not only would the temporal nexus of consciousness’s experiences 
still exist, but also a “something” we are conscious of. 88  
 Ideen I Facing Its Critics 
 Recapitulating, according to Heidegger,  Ideen I ’s second chapter, on “The Consi-
derations Fundamental to Phenomenology” starts with the “natural attitude” and 
ascends to eidetic-transcendental considerations from §39 onwards, where it “repeats” 
the “Cartesian gesture” and abandons facticity. For Ricoeur, the whole section 
remains in the “natural attitude” though dragging a Cartesian handicap, and is thus 
“dispensable.” For Boehm, this whole second chapter remains within the “natural 
attitude” but it is not preparatory nor “dispensable” in spite of its ambiguities, for it 
prepares the transcendental analyses that appear from §52 onwards. 
 Regarding Heidegger, we offer four comments. The  ﬁ rst  is that, in his reading 
of Part II’s second and third chapters he overlooks  at least  two  radically different 
senses of  immanence and  transcendence , corresponding to the natural and to the 
 83  As Husserl himself asserts (see §§33–39, and a footnote to §41). 
 84  Boehm refers to Husserl’s commentary at the end of §46. See footnote 57 above. 
 85  See §§52–55, ibid., 105 ff.; ibid., 99 ff. 
 86  Boehm, R.,  op. cit ., 517. 
 87  Ideas I , 113;  Hua III/1, 106–107. Boehm, R.,  op. cit ., 518–19. 
 88  See ibid., 521–26. 
427
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
transcendental-phenomenological attitudes. Also, being intent in stressing the 
text’s apparent “abysses of sense,” he misses in it signi ﬁ cant nuances. His ontological 
horizon of interrogation, 89  may explain his rather hasty reading. For example, 
Heidegger interprets §44 as already introducing a  transcendental distinction 
between immanence and transcendence—while in fact it is a merely “worldly” 
one. He disregards Husserl’s remark that: “It is the case also of a mental process 
that it is never perceived completely, that it cannot be adequately seized upon in its 
full unity. A mental process is, with respect to its essence, in  ﬂ ux which we, direct-
ing the re ﬂ ective regard to it, can swim along after it starting from the Now-point, 
while the stretches already covered are lost to our perception. Only in the form of 
retention do we have a consciousness of the phase which has just  ﬂ owed away, or 
else in the form of a retrospective recollection.” This applies, he adds, to “my 
whole stream of mental processes.” Yet “ this  incompleteness or ‘imperfection,’ … 
is radically different from the … ‘imperfection’ pertaining to the essence of the 
perception of something ‘transcendent’.” 90  Husserl’s only contention here is that, 
despite its  sui generis “imperfection,” immanent perception in this “psychologi-
cally-worldly” sense is “absolute” in opposition to transcendent perception for it 
does not appear in “adumbrations.” 
 Second , regarding §49 (entitled misleadingly “Absolute Consciousness as the 
Residuum after the Annihilation of the World”) Heidegger highlights only this 
passage: “ Immanent being is therefore indubitably absolute being in the sense that 
by essential necessity nulla ’re’ indiget ad existendum .” 91 He skips the opposed 
methodological hypothesis that immediately follows, according to which “con-
sciousness, with its  constituent mental processes and with the  course it runs , is 
actually of such a nature that the conscious subject …,  could  effect all such 
concatenations” of actual and possible experience in “mutual understanding with 
other Egos …; let us assume, furthermore, that … nothing whatever is lacking which 
is requisite for the appearance of a unitary world and for the rational theoretical 
cognition of such a world.” 92 Under these conditions, the question is whether it is 
“still  conceivable and not rather a countersense that the corresponding transcendent 
world  does not exist ?” 93 In the transcendental context of this section, not merely 
referred to two opposed regions of natural being, the expressions “annihilation of 
the world” and “consciousness as residuum” are indeed unfortunate, yet they are 
merely strategic expressions among other possible ones. 94 Husserl rebukes them in 
 89  Plato’s question in  The Sophist (“What do you then mean when you use (the word) ‘being’?”). 
 See GA 20 , 179;  HCT , 129. 
 90  Ideas I , p. 97;  Hua III/1, 93–94. 
 91  Ibid., 110; ibid., 104. 
 92  Ibid., 110–11; ibid., 104–105. 
 93  Loc. cit. 
 94  Correctly understood, in §49 Husserl does not oppose two ontic domains, but introduces an 
 ontological distinction based upon phenomenological  experience . Transcendental  consciousness is 
 absolute or pure because it is an “absolutely” insurmountable  experience in relation to every enun-
ciation referring to the sense or validity of being. 
428
R.R.P. Lerner
his  Erste Philosophie (1923/24) as the “objection of madness,” 95  since the true 
sense of the  ἐpocή and the reduction means the  abstention of every thesis , “posi-
tion taking,” or “belief”—such as “negation,” “doubt,” or “annihilation.” 
 Third , Heidegger objects his “fourth determination” to  pure consciousness, as 
detached from reality or from the “factually existing human being’s real consciousness.” 
In §53 Husserl himself approaches this problem pointing out how consciousness as 
 constitutive is absolute, and, as  constituted is transcendent—as the rest of the 
psycho-physical world. 96 The conciliation between both points of view is the fruit 
of a peculiar apprehending or apperception. 97 But even as intertwined with a physical 
entity in the natural attitude, psychological consciousness does  not appear through 
sensuous adumbrations. 98 The  psychologist in the natural attitude , he says, already 
makes this distinction. In the phenomenological transcendental attitude we turn to 
the pure life of transcendental consciousness, which “… ‘lies,’ in a certain sense, 
 within what is psychologically apperceived, in the mental process as a human 
state.” 99 
 Finally, relating this commentary to the previous one, transcendental phenome-
nology is an eidetic discipline, and pure consciousness is related to the mental 
human processes as an  eidos to its  factum. Heidegger is perfectly aware, from his 
examination of the  a priori and of  categorial intuition  that every individual, empirical, 
“this-here” has its  speci ﬁ c character , essence or “what” shared by other similar 
individuals. 100 Yet he insists that Husserl introduces a divorce between consciousness’s 
 eidos and the psychophysical  factum , ignoring his contentions on the “Inseparability 
between Matter of Fact and Essence.” 101 Husserl in fact had already started dealing 
with certain problems irreducible to eidetic reduction, 102 such as given factual reality 
or the “ultimate problems of being,” 103  under the heading of “metaphysics in another 
sense” or “second philosophy.” 104  Phenomenology as “  ﬁ rst  philosophy,” presupposing 
 95  Hua VIII, 55. There he adds: “World existence is absolutely indubitable, and this indubitability 
is implied in the perception of the world itself where we continuously live.” 
 96  Ideas I, 124;  Hua III/1, 116–18. 
 97  Ibid., p. 125; ibid., 117. 
 98  Loc. cit. 
 99  Loc. cit .; ibid., 118. Our emphasis. 
 100  Which is what Husserl contends in  Ideen I ’s Part I (“Essence and Eidetic Cognition”).  See ibid., 
5 ff.; ibid., 10 ff.. 
 101  Ibid., 7 ff., 15 ff.; ibid., 12–13 ff., 22–23 ff. On the other hand, pure phenomenology is a  sui 
generis “descriptive” eidetic science, opposed to other eidetic, “exact sciences,” such as geometry. 
Indeed, its essences are  morphological , neither ideal nor exact, (ibid., 169; ibid., 158) their clarity 
depending on the clarity attained in the corresponding sensuous intuitions (ibid., 156–57; ibid., 
145). Heidegger sees a dualistic Cartesian gap between pure consciousness as  eidos and the reality 
wherein it “resides,” which is misleading. (See  GA 20, 145–47;  HCT, 106–107). 
 102  Iso Kern,  Idee und Methode der Philosophy: Leitgedanken für eine Theorie der Vernunft (Berlin: 
Walter de Gruyter, 1975), 338. 
 103  Also referred to as “supreme and ultimate questions.”  CM, 156;  Hua I, 182. 
 104  See ibid., 155–56; Ibid., 181–82. 
429
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
these ultimate “transcendental facts,” orients its meditation based on the constitutive 
experience of every sense and validity of being. 105 
 Regarding Ricoeur, it is correct that the “ambiguities” of  Ideen I ’s Part II and its 
“Cartesian air” puzzle the reader. However, we do not believe—following Boehm—that 
those analyses are merely “preliminary” and hence dispensable. Husserl himself, in 
his marginal annotations of the 1923–1924 C Copy, reevaluates Part II’s second 
chapter as preparing the execution of transcendental reduction starting from 
psychology. Furthermore, its alleged “Cartesianism” is much more conspicuous in 
the next chapter’s §49, 106 since it gives the false impression of a relapse into 
solipsism—as Husserl himself remarked in his 1923–1924 lectures: that pure 
consciousness is a mundane “residuum” after the world’s destruction. 107  It is only a 
“ ﬁ ctitious hypothesis” whereby its sense within the phenomenological attitude is to 
understand how our world belief is forged. Yet this strategy prevents seeing how the 
world horizon as a  whole is the correlate of transcendental intersubjectivity. Hence 
the “indispensability” of Husserl’s previous preliminary sections of intentional 
psychology becomes understandable. 
 The “transcendental idealism” outlined between  Ideen I ’s §§44–49 (albeit the 
expression does not appear there)—causing Ricoeur’s uneasiness in addition to the 
concept of “constitution”—alienated Husserl from many of his contemporaries and 
followers. Recently published manuscripts 108 offer new arguments in favor of 
transcendental idealism in less problematic versions. For example, his strategy in 
 Transzendentaler Idealismus ( Hua XXXVI) is neither “Cartesian” nor rests on an 
opposition between the apodictic immanent sphere and a presumptive transcendence, 
but rather “Leibnizian,” based on the difference between an  empty presumption and 
a  justi ﬁ ed one of the  possibility of an object . 109 
 Regarding Boehm, our  ﬁ rst comment is that he overlooks a sense of immanence 
and transcendence introduced by Husserl’s 1910/11 lecture course entitled 
“Fundamental Problems of Phenomenology.” 110 Here the 1907 second concept of 
“immanence” disappears. 111 As if anticipating future critiques, Husserl is perfectly 
 105  If in  Ideen I the transcendental  ego as  eidos is a “pure possibility” that precedes reality, in later 
texts Husserl contends that: “the  eidos of the transcendental  ego is unthinkable without the 
transcendental  ego as factual” ( Hua XV, 385). 
 106  “Absolute Consciousness as the Residuum after the Annihilation of the World” ( Ideas I , 109; 
 Hua III/1, 103). 
 107  Hua VIII, 432–33, 479–82, 499–500;  Crisis , 162–63. 
 108  See  Hua XXXVI (manuscripts from 1908 to 1921 on “transcendental idealism”), and  Hua XX/1 
(the 1913 draft for the re-edition of the “Sixth Logical Investigation”). 
 109  The “modes of being” of the objects  given in these different “intuitive modes of consciousness” 
depend on the  intentional correlation ; thus he now avoids the strategic error of arguing in favor of 
the “independence” of consciousness regarding objects. Husserl’s  phenomenological idealism 
consists, in sum, in the assertion that  possible being is the being that has the  possibility of being 
 intuitively given. 
 110  Hua XIII, 111–94. 
 111  Namely, the phenomenologically “given” as having an alleged absolute character. 
430
R.R.P. Lerner
aware of the incompatibility between the “absolute givenness” previously de ﬁ ned, 
and the unending temporal extension of the  ﬁ eld of phenomenological experience. 
Even in phenomenological perception an “enduring being” is given: its “nows” 
become “recent pasts” while ever new “nows” emerge. “ Absolute givenness ” in the 
former sense, and “ this whole enterprise of disconnecting ,  loses its sense ,” 112 for 
what is  given is not only the immediate present but duration itself, the “now” being 
given alongside  retention and its immediate “has-been.” A certain “transcendence” 
is admitted  within the phenomenological sphere as data. 113 Consequently, if absolute 
certainties are not demanded of the natural researcher and are not necessary to 
establish strict sciences, 114 then the former objections do not hinder the realization 
“of a science of lived-experiences in phenomenological reduction.” 115 Boehm 
overlooked  this sense of immanence that includes—beyond what is  actually 
given —what is  potentially given (consciousness’s absent, non-actual, implied 
components). The transcendent object, in its turn, is here an “ index of determinate 
and pure plexuses of consciousness.” It is an implicit 1910–1911 critique of the 
Cartesian way and  Ideen I does not ignore these results. 116 
 Second , in  Ideen I Husserl distinguishes between the eidetic and the transcendental-
phenomenological, 117  levels that were not distinguished in 1907. Not only do empirical 
sciences belong to the natural attitude and are thus disconnected, but also the eidetic 
(material and formal) sciences are. The psychological-intentional analyses of the second 
chapter of “The Considerations Fundamental to Phenomenology” are eidetic but belong 
to the natural attitude. If Boehm had taken this into consideration, Husserl’s descrip-
tions would not have seemed so “confusing.” In §62 Husserl asks himself whether a 
“science of facts of the transcendentally reduced lived-experiences” could be considered, 
since “speci ﬁ cally phenomenological disconnections … independently of the eidetic 
disconnection of individual existence” 118 have been given. Although he there rejects 
this possibility, the effective phenomenological work is given on the basis of the “de 
facto transcendental ego and particular data given in transcendental experience of the 
ego” that for the phenomenologist “have the signi ﬁ cance merely of examples of pure 
possibilities.” 119  
 Furthermore, neither in  Ideen I nor in the  Cartesianische Meditationen— as many 
ascertain based on a merely super ﬁ cial consideration—is the “Cartesian way” 
exclusively employed. Iso Kern already showed that  Ideen I employs not only the 
“psychological way” but also the “ontological way” in its  ﬁ rst part. 120 
 112  Ibid., 160. 
 113  Ibid., 162. 
 114  Ibid., 168. 
 115  Loc. cit . 
 116  See  Ideen I , §35. 
 117  See  Ideen I , xx;  Hua III/1, 6. 
 118  Ibid., 143; ibid., 134. 
 119  That is why “we naturally con ﬁ ne ourselves thenceforth within the limits of a purely eidetic 
phenomenology” ( CM , 73;  Hua I, 107). This commentary also addresses Heidegger’s critique to 
the “ideal” disincarnate subject. 
 120  Iso Kern,  Husserl und Kant. Eine Untersuchung über Husserls Verhältnis zu Kant und zum 
Neukantianismus , Phaenomenologica 16 (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964), 221–35, 238. 
431
25  Ideen I Confronting Its Critics
 Conclusion 
 If many of Husserl’s breakthrough insights have remained unscathed after 
being submitted to frequent and relentless “deconstructions” by his alleged 
followers, it may be due to some lasting methodological tools offered by  Ideen I ’s 
phenomenological practice.  First to be mentioned is the radical difference 
and yet undeniable intertwinement between facts and essences, both their 
difference and intertwinement clearly accessible through varied and  sui generis 
modes of givenness or intuitions. The characterization of  facts as realities or 
 actualities and  essences  as  possibilities , and the distinction between empirical 
or ideal possibilities, as well as between  exact ideal possibilities and  morphological 
ideal possibilities is enabled by the repeated practice of “intuition” as the 
“principle of all principles” and ultimate source of evidence.  Second to be 
mentioned is the radical difference between the natural and the transcendental 
consciousnesses and attitudes, intuitively graspable through a correct approach 
to the different meanings of immanence and transcendence. Thus consciousness 
as an  object-in-the-world opposes two different  regions  of natural reality: an 
immanent or psychological one, and a transcendent or physical one; whereas 
consciousness as  subject-for-the-world faces us with a realm of  transcendental 
“immanence” that properly knows no “outside” for every “objective in-itself” 
can only be understood as  correlative to it, in the sense of  constituted  by it in an 
open-ended, temporal, ever modifying horizonal process. This open-ended temporal 
nature of consciousness takes us  ﬁ nally to the open-ended and perfectible 
character of phenomenological descriptions 121  that may be taken up time and again, 
generation after generation, by communities of phenomenologists guided by the 
idea of an absolutely founded knowledge (in the sense of being ultimately 
responsible for it), 122 and by the practical goal of a completely ethical life capable of 
revolutionizing the ways of life of a new spiritual humanity.
 In the manner of true science this path is endless. Accordingly, phenomenology demands 
that the phenomenologist foreswear the ideal of a philosophic system and yet as a humble 
worker in community with others, live for a  philosophia perennis . 123 
 121  “Our procedure is that of an explorer journeying through an unknown part of the world, and 
carefully describing what is presented along his unbeaten paths, which will not always be the 
shortest. Such an explorer can rightfully be  ﬁ lled with the sure con ﬁ dence that he gives utterance 
to what, at the time and under the circumstances,  must be said—something which, because it is the 
faithful expression of something seen, will always retain its value—even though new explorations 
will require new descriptions with manifold improvements. With a like conviction, in the sequel 
we propose to be faithful describers of phenomenological structures and, moreover, to preserve the 
habit of inner freedom even with respect to our own description” ( Ideas I , 235;  Hua III/1, 224). 
 122  “Epilogue,” Edmund Husserl,  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a 
Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book,  Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution 
( Edmund Husserl Collected Works , vol. III), trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1952), 406;  Hua III, 139. 
 123  Edmund Husserl,  Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confrontation 
with Heidegger (1927–1931) , trans. and ed. T. Sheehan and R. Palmer (Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1997);  Collected Works , vol. VI, 170. 
433
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_26, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Derrida in the Voice of Husserl 
 And after the earthquake a  ﬁ re; but Yahweh was not in the  ﬁ re: 
 And after the  ﬁ re a still small voice. 
 —1 Kings 19:12 
 Now spoken sounds are symbols of affections in the soul, 
 and written marks symbols of spoken sounds. 
 —Aristotle,  De Interpretatione 
 Language speaks as the peal of stillness. 
 —Martin Heidegger, “Language” 
 The impact of  Ideen I 1 —which Derrida called “the most elaborated trace” 2 of the 
 ﬁ rst phase of phenomenology—upon his early formulation of the project of 
deconstruction is well-known. It is widely accepted that many of Derrida’s original 
concepts are direct descendants of Husserl’s work. 3 The thrust of Derrida’s criticisms 
 V. W.  Cisney (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Gettysburg College ,  Gettysburg ,  PA ,  USA 
e-mail:  vcisney@gmail.com 
 Chapter 26 
 Jacques Derrida and the Future 
 Vernon  W.  Cisney  
 1  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch. Husserliana Band III (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950);  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure 
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book , trans. Fred Kersten (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1983). 
 2  Jacques Derrida, “‘Genèse et structure’ et la phénoménologie,”  L’écriture et la différence (Paris, 
Éditions du Seuil, 1967); “‘Genesis and Structure’ and Phenomenology,”  Writing and Difference , 
trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1978), 161. 
 3  For instance, trace,  différance , supplementarity, iterability, auto-affection, etc. See Leonard 
Lawlor,  Derrida and Husserl: The Basic Problem of Phenomenology (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2002). The entirety of this text is dedicated to this complex question. I am deeply 
indebted, personally, professionally, and philosophically, to Leonard Lawlor. 
434
V.W. Cisney
and appropriations of Husserl will come down to Husserl’s theory of language, 
speci ﬁ cally its relations to the origin and possibility of meaning, and the structure 
of conscious life itself.  What, then, is at stake? This question animates the entirety 
of Derrida’s re ﬂ ections, and his response appears to be  nothing less than phenome-
nology’s announced “principle of all principles” and therefore, the very foundation 
of the project: “The stakes of this disentanglement are therefore the phenomenological 
motif itself.” 4 Despite Husserl’s ceaseless efforts to establish an absolute science 
beyond the trappings of naïve metaphysics, Husserl is nevertheless committed to 
what Derrida calls, following Heidegger’s lead, the “metaphysics of presence.” 
 The “metaphysics of presence” is one of three basic elements that comprise the 
project of deconstruction. Put brie ﬂ y, this history, following the Platonic-Aristotelian 
moment, consists of a  decision . It begins by establishing binary categories (form/
particular, substance/accident, noumenon/phenomenon, mind/body, etc.) in order to 
think the nature of being. Within each binary, one term is most properly characterized 
as  present , the other as  absent . This presence (or immediacy) is understood in the 
dual senses of spatial and temporal: what is  closest as the object of knowledge; and 
the present  now as the founding basis of certainty. Then the term of presence is 
prioritized, marginalizing the term of absence. 5 Following the  decision,  the next 
element is the  necessity of this decision. Derrida never denies the centrality of the 
founding moment of presence, nor does he suggest that philosophy can ever do 
away with this privileging. 6 The  ﬁ nal element of deconstruction is the realization of 
the constitutive role of absence and the irreducible complicity thereof with the 
founding privilege of presence. Deconstruction is not something done  to a text. 
Rather, it is always already at work in the text, constituting, but also undermining, 
the presumed certainty of meaning therein—the constitutive play of presence and 
absence, intrinsic to the nature of language itself. In Husserl, the privileging of 
presence assumes its most virulent form in the  principle of all principles : “ that 
 4  Jacques Derrida, “La Forme et le vouloir-dire: Note sur la phenomenology du langage,”  Marges 
de la philosophie (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, 1972); “Form and Meaning: A Note on the 
Phenomenology of Language,”  Margins of Philosophy , trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press, 1982), 161. Nearly the whole of Derrida’s engagement with Husserl re ﬂ ects such 
an urgency: “If the punctuality of the instant is a myth … then the principle of Husserl’s entire 
argumentation is threatened.” Jacques Derrida,  La voix et le phénomène (Paris: Presses Universitaires 
de France, 1967);  Voice and Phenomenon , trans. Leonard Lawlor (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 2011), 52. 
 5  For instance, the priority of the  form for Plato lies in the fact that it remains  present , unchanging, 
through each  present moment of time, the  ﬂ uctuation of the material world notwithstanding. This 
is why only the  form can serve as the basis of knowledge for Plato. 
 6  Derrida consistently claims that philosophy requires the foundationalist value of presence. This is, 
in part, the reason for which metaphysics can never be “escaped” in any strong sense of the word: 
“supposing, which I do not believe, that someday it will be possible  simply to escape metaphysics…” 
Jacques Derrida, “Sémiologie et grammatologie. Jacques Derrida,”  Positions, (Paris: Les Éditions 
de Minuit, 1972); “Semiology and Gramatology: Interview with Julia Kristeva,”  Positions , trans. 
Alan Bass (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1981), 17; also, “‘the founding value of 
presence’ is a pleonastic expression,” Derrida,  Voice and Phenomenon , 6. 
435
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
every originary presentive intuition is a legitimizing source of cognition ,” 7 along 
with Husserl’s notion of the “living present” as the “ stream-form ,” “which  necessarily 
comprises all mental processes pertaining to a pure Ego .” 8 Despite these traditional 
commitments to presence, Derrida will locate within Husserl’s text a play of absence, 
an exteriority within interiority. 
 We begin with Husserl’s notion of the  epochē , 9 which suspends our faith in the 
natural attitude, leaving only a “relation between perceiving and perceived,” which 
“becomes given essentially in ‘pure immanence,’…” 10 This relation, Husserl 
characterizes, respectively, as the relation between the poles of “noesis” and 
“noema.” The noema is the “ something given ” 11 of consciousness, as Derrida says, 
“the objectivity of the object, the meaning and the ‘as such’ of the thing for 
consciousness.” 12 But the noema does not  belong to consciousness. The noema is 
not the  actual thing (put out of play in the  epochē ), “nor is it a properly subjective 
moment … since it is indubitably given as an object for consciousness.” 13 
Consciousness does not  create its noematic correlate—rather the noema is “the 
world or something of the world  for consciousness.” 14 The noema belongs neither to 
the world, nor to consciousness. It is  anarchic , and “this  anarchy of the noema is the 
root and very possibility of objectivity and of meaning.” 15  Because it belongs neither 
to the actual world, nor to the  ego , the noema can serve as an objective foundation 
for meaning, an ideality, repeatable in the absence of the cognizing subject. This 
ideality is inseparable from Husserl’s employment of the Kantian sense of the  Idee : 
“There is no  ideality unless an Idea in the Kantian sense is at work…” 16 
 In the  Kritik der reinen Vernunft , Kant de ﬁ nes an  Idee as “a concept, made up of 
notions, which goes beyond the possibility of experience.” 17 The  Idee in the Kantian 
sense appears very few times in  Ideen I , yet for Derrida it ful ﬁ lls two basic roles: 
(1) A  telos , directing the phenomenologist in his “in ﬁ nite theoretical anticipation 
which simultaneously is given as an in ﬁ nite practical task.” 18 Contrasted with 
geometric concepts, the  eidē of phenomenology are necessarily and essentially 
 7  Husserl,  Ideen I , §24. 
 8  Ideen I, §82. 
 9  Of the  epochē, Derrida claims that it “has been and still is a major indispensable gesture. In every-
thing I try to say and write the  epochē  is implied,” Jacques Derrida, “Hospitality, Justice and 
Responsibility: A Dialogue with Jacques Derrida,”  Questioning Ethics: Contemporary Debates in 
Philosophy , ed. Richard Kearney and Mark Dooley (London: Routledge, 1998), 81. 
 10  Ideen I , §88. 
 11  Ibid. 
 12  Derrida, “Genesis and Structure,” 163. 
 13  Ibid. 
 14  Ibid. 
 15  Ibid. 
 16  Derrida,  Voice and Phenomenon , 8. 
 17  Immanuel Kant,  Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Riga: Hartknoch, 1787);  Critique of Pure Reason , 
trans. Paul Guyer, Allen W. Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), A 320/B 377.  
 18  Derrida, “Genesis and Structure,” 167. 
436
V.W. Cisney
“anexact,” 19  morphological essences , as Husserl calls them, which “‘approach’ 
more or less closely without ever reaching” those “ideal essences, as  ideal ‘limits’ 
which it is essentially impossible to  ﬁ nd in any sensuous intuition…” 20 This process of 
examining and articulating these morphological essences is a necessarily in ﬁ nite 
task, but an indispensable one without which the stated purpose of phenomenology 
never gets off the ground; (2) A uni ﬁ cation of the disparate series of mental 
processes. Just after discussing the phenomenological account of time, Husserl goes 
on to describe the way in which these disparate mental processes must be constituted 
as a unitary stream: “In the continuous progression from seizing-upon to seizing-upon…
we now seize upon the  stream of mental processes as a unity… in the manner of an 
 idea in the Kantian sense. ” 21 We recognize the limitless capability of the pure Ego 
to attend its regard to ever  new mental processes, but this is possible only on the 
basis of a unity of the disparate time- ﬂ ows of the various processes. Furthermore, 
without this unity, nothing like  knowledge or  perception would be possible. Thus, 
the unity of the stream is not given in such a way that its content can ever be 
adequately determined; it is not, as it were,  given to experience as such. Nevertheless, 
Husserl claims, it is “an absolutely indubitable givenness.” 22 Phenomenology strives 
to be a purely descriptive science, and yet, in these two ways, the  Idee in the Kantian 
sense occupies a constitutive role, marking “the irruption of the in ﬁ nite into con-
sciousness.” 23 The non-presence of the Kantian  Idee makes possible the realm of 
phenomenological inquiry. 
 What more can we  say regarding noematic sense? Husserl ascribes to the 
noetic-noematic structure a layering, speci ﬁ cally a distinction between a 
“‘pre-expressive’ layer of lived-experience,” 24 and “the expressive act-strata,” 25 a 
silent realm of sense ( Sinn ) and its founded expressive acts. Opening §124 of  Ideen I , 
Husserl writes, “Interwoven with all the acts considered before are the expressive 
act-strata…”  All the acts considered before : that is to say, Husserl’s entire account of 
phenomenological consciousness, “everything occurs as if transcendental experience 
were silent, inhabited by no language…” 26 Indeed, Husserl’s further comments 
con ﬁ rm Derrida’s reading, as Husserl goes on to distinguish “‘sense’ in the case of all 
intentive mental processes,” from “ signi ﬁ cation ,” which characterizes “the linguistic 
sphere, that of ‘expressing.’” 27  Husserl thus once again demonstrates his traditional 
commitment to presence. The linguistic sign is traditionally understood as a  stand in 
 19  Ibid., 162. Derrida prefers this term to “inexact” because their incapacity for exactness is through 
no fault of their own, but rather, derives from an essential fact about their nature. 
 20  Ideen I , §74. 
 21  Ideen I , §83. 
 22  Ibid. 
 23  Derrida, “Genesis and Structure,” 162. 
 24  Derrida,  Voice and Phenomenon , 13. 
 25  Ideen I , §124. 
 26  Derrida, “Form and Meaning,” 158. 
 27  Ideen I , §124. 
437
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
for something which is not  here , not  now . The sign is thus an  absence , as opposed to the 
 living presence of the thing it represents. At each moment, the tradition has declared 
the essence of sense to reside in silence: (Yahweh speaks in a silent  voice , the  spoken 
sign is a symbol of affections in the soul, language speaks as the call of silence). 
In  deciding then upon a silent, pre-expressive stratum of sense, Husserl thus secures 
the founding moment of presence, the very same that the tradition in its entirety has 
secured. 
 Once this decision is made, Derrida claims, “discourse will be able only to  repeat 
or to  reproduce a content of sense which does not await discourse in order to be 
what it is … will only transport to the exterior a sense that is constituted before it 
and without it …  exteriorizing a content of interior thought.” 28 Thus discourse  creates 
nothing new , and adds nothing to sense—it is essentially unproductive. Yet,  because 
it does nothing to alter sense, merely  ex -pressing the unadulterated noematic sense, 
the issuing into expression “raises it to the realm of ‘Logos,’ of the  conceptual ,” 29 and 
hence guarantees the possibility of the perfect  repeatability of sense, its universality 
and objectivity. 
 Furthermore, “anything,” Husserl writes, “meant in the noematic sense (and, more 
particularly, as the noematic core) pertaining to any act, no matter which, is  expressible 
by means of ‘ signi ﬁ cations .’” 30 As Derrida puts it, “everything must be capable of 
being said…of attaining the conceptual generality which properly constitutes the 
logic of the logos.” 31 At the very same moment as discourse  ex -presses sense, sense 
 im -presses, presses itself upon, discourse: “In the noetic respect, a particular act-stratum 
should be designated under the heading of ‘expressing’ to which, in their own peculiar 
way,  all other acts are to conform  and with which they are to fuse in a distinctive manner 
so that every noematic act-sense, and consequently the relationship to objectivity lying 
in it, is ‘conceptually’  stamped on the noematic correlate of the expressing.” 32  
 This impression, however, cannot be innocent. It impresses itself in a language and 
in a conceptuality that precede it. “Concepts themselves are always older than sense, 
and in turn constitute a text.” 33 Even if this were  not the case, even if we might suppose 
a   ﬁ rst welcoming of sense into discourse, the sheer “systematic order of meaning,” the 
structurality inherent to the very possibility of meaning, “in some way would have had 
to impose its sense upon sense, dictating the form of sense, obliging it to imprint itself 
according to a given rule, syntactic or otherwise.” 34  Therefore, although discourse 
may reproduce, without addition, the noematic sense, this sense can and must imprint 
itself in discourse in accordance with a given conceptuality and/or order, such that, 
even if discourse is not productive, it nevertheless “ paints something” 35 in sense. 
 28  Derrida, “Form and Meaning,” 162–63. 
 29  Ideen I , §124. 
 30  Ibid. 
 31  Derrida, “Form and Meaning,” 164. 
 32  Ideen I , §124, my emphases. 
 33  Derrida, “Form and Meaning,” 165. 
 34  Ibid. 
 35  Ibid. 
438
V.W. Cisney
 This silence is thus contaminated by what it sought to exclude. 36 But this brings 
us to our concluding remarks. Derrida’s criticisms of Husserl, and hence the very 
origins of deconstruction itself, do not derive from a haughty effort on the part of 
Derrida to “make a name for himself” by opposing or denigrating an orthodoxy  du 
jour . They derive rather from a sincere and profound respect for Husserl’s discoveries, 
from over a decade spent working through the myriad texts in which those discoveries 
lay. To the end of his life, Derrida declared himself a faithful inheritor of the tradition 
that Husserl established. 37  At stake , rather, is the revelation of the “contaminations” 
endemic to the various  parallelisms that Husserl relied upon: “And we may ask if 
some irreducible complicity, between Being as Being-present in the form of meaning 
( bedeuten ) and Being as being-present in the so-called pre-expressive form of sense 
( Sinn ), has not been operative, welding the strata to each other, as well as permitting 
them both to be related one to the other and to be articulated within this entire 
problematic. Is this not the site of the decision for all the problems we have 
discerned thus far?” 38 Deconstruction is, at its core, the meditation on this irreducible 
complicity. Again,  not to prove that Husserl is  wrong in privileging presence, in 
valorizing silence, in valorizing the now, etc. But rather, to show the contamination 
of what is valorized by what it seeks to exclude. As he says, “one probably does not 
have to choose between two lines of thought. Rather, one has to meditate upon the 
circularity which makes them pass into one another inde ﬁ nitely. And also, by rigorously 
repeating this  circle in its proper historical possibility, perhaps to let some  elliptical 
displacement be produced in the difference of repetition…” 39 In doing so, we engender 
an openness for thinking itself, clearing a path “toward the unnamable.” 40 
 Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future in the Shadow of Husserl 
 The future can only be anticipated in 
 the form of an absolute danger. 
 —Jacques Derrida,  Of Grammatology 
 As Merleau-Ponty notes, we stand and think in the shadow of Husserl. 41 A century 
after the initial publication of Husserl’s  Ideen I , perhaps it is still too soon to fully 
 36  For the sake of brevity, I shall not here go into the illuminating discussion of the voice as found 
in  Voice and Phenomenon . Here, Derrida ties this discussion of silence and the phenomenological 
voice to his analysis of the other and of time in Husserl’s philosophy, in a much richer way than we 
are able to accomplish here. See also Lawlor’s book,  Derrida and Husserl: The Basic Problem of 
Phenomenology . 
 37  See Jacques Derrida,  Voyous: Deux essais sur la raison  (Paris: Éditions Galilée, 2003);  Rogues: 
Two Essays on Reason , trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2005), 134. 
 38  Derrida, “Form and Meaning,” 171. 
 39  Ibid., 173. 
 40  Derrida,  Voice and Phenomenon , 66. 
 41  Maurice Merleau-Ponty, “Le Philosophe et son ombre,”  Signes (Paris: Gallimard, 1960); “The 
Philosopher and His Shadow,”  Signs , trans. Richard C. McCleary (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1964), 159–81. 
439
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
take stock of his impact. But if, as Hegel claimed, “the owl of Minerva begins its 
 ﬂ ight, only with the onset of dusk,” 42 we can say with con ﬁ dence that in the waning 
moments of twilight, immediately preceding dusk, the shadows cast are at their 
longest. Husserl’s shadow is no different: it encapsulates a broad and diverse group 
(if we may permit ourselves the use of such a term) of philosophers and of 
philosophical movements, charting a myriad of problems, schools, and trajectories 
of thinking. Despite (or perhaps  because of ) his immense impact, philosophy enters 
the twenty- ﬁ rst century in a fragmented state, and this is true not only of the 
Anglo-American  division between the so-called analytic and continental practices 
of philosophy; it is true even  within the community of philosophers who consider 
themselves inheritors of the continental tradition.  Our task in this paper, then, will 
be to address, in a propaedeutic manner, that most basic of philosophical questions: 
in the shadow of Husserl,  what is philosophy ? What  should it be, and what  can it be? 
 The question is perhaps audacious, but its audacity must not overshadow its 
necessity. This is especially true, given that two of the thinkers who stood most 
prominently in the shadow cast by Husserl—Derrida and Deleuze—reached (at 
least ostensibly) wholly incompatible conclusions regarding the nature and task of 
philosophy, 43 with Deleuze af ﬁ rming Hyppolite’s assertion that, “ Philosophy must 
be ontology, it cannot be anything else ,” 44 and Derrida (echoing Heidegger’s call for 
a  Destruktion of the history of ontology) claiming that, “the supplement is neither a 
presence nor an absence. No ontology can think its operation.” 45  Indeed we see similar 
disparity, as we trace through the developments of the twentieth century; we see 
terms scattered, taken up, used, discarded, etc., in various ways at various times by 
various thinkers. Moreover the senses of the terms themselves are not univocal. 
“Metaphysics,” to take but one example, has an altogether different meaning 
for Bergson, for Heidegger, for Levinas, for Derrida, and for Deleuze. Husserl 
himself was deeply suspicious of what he called “ historically degenerate meta-
physics ,” 46 while, for Bergson,  metaphysics takes us to the absolute, the very heart 
 42  G.W.F. Hegel,  Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (Berlin: Nicolai’schen Buchhandlung, 
1821); “Preface,”  Elements of the Philosophy of Right . 
 43  In a future paper, I shall address this issue, the apparent Derrida-Deleuze disagreement, head-on.  
 44  Gilles Deleuze, “Jean Hyppolie— Logique et existence, ”  L’île déserte et autres texts (Paris: 
Éditions de Minuit, 2002); “Jean Hyppolite’s  Logic and Existence ,”  Desert Islands and Other Texts 
(1953–1974) , ed. David Lapoujade, trans. Michael Taormina (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2004), 
15. Hyppolite de ﬁ nes philosophy as “the expression of being in concepts or in discourse.” See Jean 
Hyppolite,  Logique et existence  (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1953);  Logic and 
Existence , trans. Leonard Lawlor and Amit Sen (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 
1997), 10. 
 45  Jacques Derrida,  De la Grammatologie (Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1967);  Of Grammatology , 
trans. Gayatri Spivak (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974), 314. 
 46  Edmund Husserl,  Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge. Husserliana Band I (The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1960);  Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology , trans. 
Dorion Cairns (Dordrecht, Boston, and London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999), 139. 
440
V.W. Cisney
of the thing itself. 47 Heidegger and Derrida speak repeatedly of an  overcoming of 
metaphysics , while Deleuze and Guattari write that, “the death of metaphysics or 
the overcoming of philosophy has never been a problem for us: it is just tiresome, 
idle chatter.” 48 Thus the question is well worth the asking: what then remains of a 
philosophy, of philosophy, in the shadow of Husserl? 
 Given its state of fragmentation, our questioning must begin on the soil in 
which philosophy took its  ﬁ rst breaths, the Greek landscape, as Derrida notes that 
“the founding concepts of philosophy are primarily Greek, and it would not be 
possible to philosophize, or to speak philosophically, outside this medium.” 49 It is 
Plato who taught us what a philosopher  is  and  does ; it is Plato who  ﬁ rst outlined 
for us the questions with which philosophy grapples; and so it is to Plato that we 
 ﬁ rst turn for insight as to the task before us. What we shall  ﬁ nd is that Plato’s 
philosopher is in a certain sense like Nietzsche’s, a  sounder of idols , who 
transgresses and disrupts common opinion in search of the fundamental. Husserl, 
like Plato, in combating commonplace notions (what he calls the natural attitude), 
formulates a methodology of phenomenological reduction, which exposes a pure 
 ﬁ eld of immanence, pure temporality. Thus, we must carry out a phenomenological 
analysis of the experience of time, exposing the fundamental structure of futurity 
therein, and we shall conclude by showing how this opens onto the positive task 
of the philosopher, philosophizing in the shadow of Husserl, philosophizing with 
an eye toward the future.  
 The  Doxa , the Natural Attitude, and the Philosopher 
 We turn  ﬁ rst to Plato. In the  Republic , Socrates asks of Glaucon, “Must we, therefore, 
call philosophers rather than lovers of  doxa [ d ὀ x ᾰ] those who delight in each thing 
that is itself?” to which Glaucon responds, “That is entirely certain.” 50 There are two 
elements, one positive and one negative, that de ﬁ ne the task of the philosopher in 
this characterization offered by Plato. First, the negative: the philosopher is  not an 
adherent to the  doxa  of his day, whatever it may be. In Greek philosophical 
 47  Henri Bergson, “Introduction à la métaphysique,”  La pensée et le mouvant. Essais et conférences 
(Paris: Les Presses Universitaires de France, 1934); “Introduction to Metaphysics,”  The Creative 
Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics , trans. Mabelle L. Andison (Mineola, NY: Dover 
Publications, 2007), 133–69. 
 48  Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari,  Qu’est-ce que la philosophie? (Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 
1991);  What is Philosophy? , trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1994), 9. 
 49  Jacques Derrida, “Violence et métaphysique: Essai sur la pensée d’Emmanuel Levinas,” 
 L’écriture et la différence (Paris, Éditions du Seuil, 1967); “Violence and Metaphysics: An Essay 
on the Thought of Emmanuel Levinas,”  Writing and Difference , 81. 
 50  Plato,  The Republic , 480 a. 
441
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
parlance, 51 the  doxa is the common opinion of the masses. Often (even usually) 
misguided, it is the understood, established code of  givens that an individual, as a 
citizen living in a speci ﬁ c historical culture, is inculcated with. The  ﬁ rst characteristic, 
the negative characteristic, of the philosopher according to Plato is that the philosopher 
will not be swayed by, and (if we may take Socrates as our example), will even 
positively disrupt, the  doxa . From this characteristic, the philosopher derives her 
reputation for attempting to abolish presuppositions—religious, political, cultural, 
scienti ﬁ c—in short, wherever they may be found. As Deleuze claims, “Where to 
begin in philosophy has always—rightly—been regarded as a very delicate problem, 
for beginning means eliminating all presuppositions.” 52 
 The second characteristic, this time positive, of the philosopher: the philosopher 
will seek  each thing that is itself . In seeking  the thing that is itself , the philosopher 
seeks what I shall call the  fundamental . 53 In Plato’s case, the fundamental is the 
transcendent form, never given  as such in particular things, but necessary for thinking 
them. But we need not accept the transcendent, metaphysical implications of Plato’s 
philosophy in order to accept his prescribed task for the philosopher. The fundamental, 
for our purposes, merely indicates  whatever, in whatever sense of the term, “whatever,” 
grounds, or conditions, whatever is.  We make no presumptions at this time, nor does 
the term commit us to, an ontological status of the  whatever, nor does it commit us to 
the  simple presence or purity of the origin , 54 or anything of this nature. But with this 
understanding, we have our philosophical task in sight: the disruption of the  doxa in 
pursuit of the fundamental. This  fundamental, whatever it may come to be, I shall 
henceforth refer to as  Being , and the pursuit thereof,  ontology. Philosophy is therefore 
ontology, the pursuit of the fundamental. As Miguel de Beistegui writes, “The 
essence of philosophy is concerned with one thing, and one thing only—‘being.’” 55 
 51  Parmenides too, though he does not speci ﬁ cally use the term, “philosopher,” distinguishes explicitly 
between “the steadfast heart of persuasive truth” and the “opinions of mortals” [ b r o t ῶ n  d ό x a V ], 
 Fragments , 1.29–30. 
 52  Gilles Deleuze,  Différence et Repetition, (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968); 
 Difference and Repetition , trans. Paul Patton (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 129. 
 53  I use this term quite consciously aware of the complicated history that accompanies it in the 
twentieth century, speci ﬁ cally in the works of Heidegger, Levinas, and Derrida. In 1927, 
Heidegger’s  Sein und Zeit outlined a project of “fundamental ontology,” both terms of which 
Heidegger would later abandon (and Derrida would speak approvingly of this abandonment). See 
Martin Heidegger,  Einführung in die Metaphysik (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1953);  Introduction to 
Metaphysics , trans. Gregory Fried and Richard Polt (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000), 
43–44; and Derrida,  Of Grammatology , 22. See also Emmanuel Levinas, “L’ontologie est-elle 
fondamentale,”  Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale 56 (1951), 88–98; “Is Ontology Fundamental?,” 
trans. Peter Atterton, revised by Simon Critchley and Adriaan Peperzak,  Basic Philosophical 
Writings , ed. Adriaan Peperzak, Simon Critchley, and Robert Bernasconi (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1996), 1–10. 
 54  Here I am thinking of Derrida. See, for instance,  Of Grammatology , 35–37, 65, 74; and Jacques 
Derrida,  Voice and Phenomenon , 5, 52, 59, 71, 79, 81. 
 55  Miguel de Beistegui,  Truth and Genesis: Philosophy as Differential Ontology (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 2004), ix. 
442
V.W. Cisney
If we are to continue considering ourselves inheritors of and participants in the 
tradition inaugurated by Plato, our thinking must be oriented in this way. 
 For his part, Husserl also labored arduously against a prevailing  doxa , 56  a particularly 
convincing one, which he called “the natural attitude.” The natural attitude, though 
implicit in Plato and the tradition generally, reaches its apex only with the inauguration 
of the Cartesian paradigm. The natural attitude is the non-thematic subjective 
attitude that takes for granted the factual existence of ‘the’ external world. In the 
natural attitude, I  ﬁ nd a world, a world of objects, consisting of things in pre-established 
systems of arrangement and value. They just  are , as they  are, and they just  mean so 
and so , with or without my knowledge of them, or even, with or without  any knowledge 
of them, “corporeal physical things with some spatial distribution or other are  simply 
there for me, ‘on hand’ in the literal or the  ﬁ gurative sense, whether or not I am 
particularly heedful of them and busied with them in my considering, thinking, feeling, 
or willing.” 57 I at the same time  ﬁ nd myself, a thinking thing—sometimes active, often 
passive—an embodied  soul or  mind, which  looks out upon the world of objects. 
Being, on the natural attitude, is thus divided into two categories: the objects of the 
world (what we shall call “brute being”), and thought or consciousness, which is 
conceived as ontologically distinct from brute being; brute being and thought-of-
being, my representations of being. Or, as Husserl says, in the mode of the “naïve” 58 
human being, “there emerges a fundamentally essential difference between  being as 
mental process and being as a physical thing .” 59 
 Thought, or my representations of being, arise via the intercourse of my sensory 
faculties with being, and the transmissions they receive, as interpreted and rendered 
by the brain. Thus in the natural attitude, even the scienti ﬁ c modi ﬁ cation thereof, 
there is an irreducible disconnect between being and thought. Perception is always 
translation, and translation is always, at least potentially, alteration. This puts our 
thought of being at the mercy of our sensory faculties, which can render things 
differently based upon the conditions, and based upon their own (the faculties’) 
relative strengths or weaknesses. A person with some form of color blindness, for 
instance, will represent being differently (and on the natural attitude, less  truly ) than 
a person without. Likewise, the same table may appear blue, red, or even purple, 
depending upon the intensity and hue of the lighting in the room. 
 Thus, in the natural attitude, philosophy’s ontological purpose must subordinate 
itself to the task of epistemology. Even if we grant that the task of the philosopher 
is primarily to think Being, we have already taken it as a given that Being is 
ontologically subdivided into the categories of  brute being and  thought-of-being , 
which more or less closely approximates  brute being, as it in fact  is . In order to 
 56  I am here using the word  doxa in the sense outlined above, as opposed to the precise sense with 
which Husserl employs the term in later sections of  Ideen I . See, for instance, §§103–127, 
§§146–148. 
 57  Husserl,  Ideen I , §27. 
 58  Husserl,  Ideen I , §39. 
 59  Husserl,  Ideen I , §42. 
443
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
think Being in its entirety then, the philosopher must  ﬁ rst make sure his thoughts are 
true; he must secure for himself a realm of juridicality, a realm where he can be sure 
that his perceptions and representations are, in fact, justi ﬁ ed. In other words, he 
must formulate a theory wherein he secures for himself: (1) an evaluation, the ability 
or evaluative criterion, by which he may distinguish between what does and does 
not count as a true thought or idea, and (2) a method, the means whereby the 
adequation between her thought of being and being itself is made perfect, the 
perfection of the faculty of thinking itself. 
 These two requirements posed by the natural attitude, however, unfortunately 
present the philosopher with an insuperable paradox: in order to provide an account 
of Being, I must possess the means or method of thinking, capable of perfecting the 
adequation between brute being and thought; but in order to  validate my method, I 
must already have at my disposal the ability to distinguish between a true and false 
idea. The impasse of this paradox can be highlighted by an example. If, for instance, 
I wish to know if my cleaning solution is properly mixed (if my methodology is 
sound), I can run a simple test: is the surface on which I have used it, now  clean ? 
But this test only works because I already know the desired outcome; I already 
know what  clean means, as opposed to dirty. To continue with our analogy, in the 
natural attitude, the philosopher knows neither whether the solution is or is not 
properly mixed, nor does he possess any concept of  clean. Thought, on the natural 
attitude, is forever divorced from being, and ontology on this model is forever 
damned to vain attempts at reconciliation. It is thus no surprise that the radical 
certainty afforded by the Cartesian  cogito in the so-called  way of ideas terminates in 
Humean skepticism a mere century later. 
 Overcoming the Doxa: The  Epochē and the Transcendental 
Reduction 
 In the face of this paradox, thought is born. Husserl’s response (and ours as well) is 
the return to a  ﬁ eld of immanence in order to evaluate the given as given. This takes 
the form of Husserl’s famous  principle of all principles : “ that everything originarily… 
offered  to us  in ‘intuition’ is to be accepted simply as what it is presented as being , 
but also  only within the limits in which it is presented there .” 60 His methodology is 
the absolute suspension of the natural attitude, in the mode of the phenomenological 
 epochē : “ We put out of action the general positing which belongs to the essence of 
the natural attitude .” 61 Though sharing methodological similarities with Cartesian 
doubt, the  epochē does not negate, deny, or doubt the  real existence of the world; it 
simply puts it out of play, suspends the judgment that would either af ﬁ rm  or deny 
 60  Husserl,  Ideen I , §24. 
 61  Husserl,  Ideen I , §32. 
444
V.W. Cisney
its existence, and along with it, all the propositions and conclusions of the sciences 
founded thereupon. 
 The  epochē thus fundamentally transforms our understanding of the world and of 
the things in it. But to be a truly phenomenological account, we must not stop there, 
but rather, the  epochē must be radicalized, through the  transcendental reduction , of 
which the  epochē serves as the  condition of possibility . 62 Through the reduction is 
discovered the “universal, absolutely self-enclosed and absolutely self-suf ﬁ cient 
correlation between the world itself and world-consciousness.” 63 The reduction 
reveals the transcendental ego as correlative to the world, that on the basis of which 
anything like a “world,” meaningful and endowed with value, can appear at all. 
The  epochē , radicalized in the reduction, reduces all  things , including myself, to 
their status as “sense.” Thus the sphere of experience opened up takes us to pure 
immanence, pure phenomenality, to the transcendental, the  origin of the world , what 
Zahavi calls the “ expansion of our  ﬁ eld of research.” 64 It thus reveals a plane of pure 
experience, the constituted poles of which are my subjectivity and the world. Here we 
discover what Heidegger refers to in  Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik as pure 
auto-affection, 65 which is the structure of temporalization. Thus we must carry out 
an analysis of the consciousness of time. 
 The Structural Experience of Time: 
The Phenomenology of the Living Present 
 Our own analyses of time consciousness will resemble Husserl’s in many ways, but will 
differ in some very signi ﬁ cant ways as well. Husserl’s grapplings with time will occupy 
him repeatedly throughout his career. What follows will most closely resemble Husserl’s 
discussion of the  living present , as discussed in his 1905 Göttingen lectures on 
 62  Husserl,  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. 
Husserliana Band VI (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1962);  The Crisis of European Sciences 
and Transcendental Phenomenology , §41. Most of my account of the  epochē and the reduction 
are taken from  The Crisis text, which differs from the account of the reduction(s) given in  Ideen 
I,  §§27–34. Husserl himself makes explicit his own criticisms of his earlier formulations (which 
he refers to as the “Cartesian way” in  The Crisis , §43). Brie ﬂ y, by  not distinguishing between 
the  epochē and the reduction, Husserl claims, we encounter the ego, but one that is apparently 
devoid of any content, as opposed to recognizing the sense-bestowing nature of the ego, which 
he claims is made possible only by the division between  epochē  and reduction, as explicated in 
 The Crisis .  
 63  Husserl,  The Crisis , §41. 
 64  Dan Zahavi,  Husserl’s Phenomenology (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003), 46. 
 65  Martin Heidegger,  Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik (Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann, 
1973);  Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics , trans. Richard Taft (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1990), §34, 132–36. 
445
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
 time-consciousness. 66 Reduced to pure phenomenality, our experience is always opened, 
and opening, temporally. Put otherwise, experience is always in passage. More 
appropriately, experience always  is passage. The structure of time-consciousness is 
comprised of three  moments : primal impression, retention, and protention. 
 The primal impression is the now-point, the present now—the constantly born, 
constantly dying, present  now . Husserl calls it “the ‘source-point’ with which the ‘pro-
duction’ of the enduring object begins,” 67 the punctuated center moment, the core 
of experience. Retention is  primary memory , 68 the still  living consciousness of that which 
has just passed. Protention is the fundamental structural experience of expectation, 
endemic to each living present (as when we lead with our heads through a doorway 
because we  expect that the door is going to open when we casually tap the handle). 
 Let us explore this experience further, by way of a relevant example. I sit now, 
typing at my computer. In each moment of my typing, each keystroke marks a close 
approximation to what we called our “primal impression.” Each tapping of the keys 
marks (or seems to mark) an instantaneous, momentary depression of time, akin to 
the structural element of impression. But this account of the present is not rich 
enough, and does not capture the present as it is in fact  given . For in order to cognize 
the sentence as I type it, in order for me, as thinker and typist, to keep straight in my 
mind what I am typing,  just so that I can continue thinking and typing, my memory 
must continue to hang onto what I have just typed. Moreover, if my argument is to 
have any hope for coherence, memory must hang on, not only to that which has  just 
been typed, but all that I have typed in the recent past. This reveals the structural and 
essential experience of retention in the living present. 
 To further elaborate, retention (primary memory) must be understood as distinct 
from another kind of memory, re-production. 69 Reproduction is what we typically 
think of when we casually use the term “memory,” the bringing back to consciousness, 
by way of a willed re-presentation, of a previously  present impression. In each 
moment, were it necessary to  re-produce , by an act of will, recently past impressions, 
I could never effectively cognize the present, precisely because, in each moment, 
I would be ever anew summoning back to consciousness the immediately preceding 
moments so that I could contextualize the present one (which of course has, by now, 
also passed). Conscious experience would then be a life lived  always too late . So the 
memory in the present cannot take the form of reproduction. 
 But without  some kind of memory still connected to the present, there would be 
no comprehensibility of the present, because each and every present moment would 
 present itself to consciousness as a discrete, isolated experience, one that dies just 
 66  See Edmund Husserl,  Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917). 
Husserliana Band X (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1992);  On the Phenomenology of the 
Consciousness of Internal Time (1893–1917) , trans. John Barnett Brough (Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1992), §§7–31. 
 67  Husserl,  On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , §11. 
 68  Ibid., §§11–14. 
 69  Incidentally, the failure to make this distinction is, according to Husserl, the error of Brentano. 
See Husserl,  On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , §§1–6. 
446
V.W. Cisney
as quickly as it is born. Each keystroke would appear in a self-contained moment of 
time. Hence, there could be no meaningfully  new keystroke, because I would never 
remember which keystrokes had come before. The memory needed must not be 
 willed then, but must be endemic to the very structure of conscious life itself, and 
this form of memory is primary memory, retention. It is still attached to the present; 
it has never left consciousness, but in its temporalization,  shades off into the past. 
 The future is somewhat more dif ﬁ cult, but our typing example will work just as 
well. As I type this very sentence, begun with a capital letter ‘A’, or rather, as I end the 
previous sentence, with a ‘.’, I  anticipate the next sentence, the capital letter that will 
have to lead it off, necessitating the operation of the ‘shift’ key on the keyboard. 
Thus, as the ring  ﬁ nger of my right hand hits the ‘.’ button, the pinky of my right hand, 
in anticipation of the new beginning, moves toward the ‘shift’ key, while the pinky of 
my left hand moves toward the ‘A.’ Numerous such examples could be adduced. 
As the bus approaches the stop, I stand, precisely because I  expect that it is going to 
stop at the stop. I lead with my head through the doorway because I  expect that the 
door, unlocked, will open when I casually tap the handle. Often, we are not fully 
 aware  of our expectations, unless and until they are ruptured. The shift key may have 
a crumb of food beneath it that prevents its depression; the bus may pass the stop 
without stopping; the door may be locked and I may thus hit my head. Nevertheless, 
the fact that I stood up, the fact that I hit my head, indicates this structural element of 
 openness to the future that constitutes my very experience of the present. 
 What, then, of this primal impression? It is the  Now. When is the primal impression 
 given  to consciousness? Presumably, in the very moment, the  living  moment, that it is 
happening. Indeed, when else could it be given? Yet, if the structure of time con-
sciousness demonstrates anything, it is precisely that this moment, as such, is never 
given, is never made present. The living present, as we have shown, is only ever given 
as possessing the structure of retention and protention. It is only upon re ﬂ ection that we 
assert the  truth  or  reality of a speci ﬁ c primal impression. I  hit such and such a key—that 
happened  in a moment . I  will hit such and such a key—it  will happen in  some future 
moment. But what of this moment? It appears only in retention, reproduction, and protention. 
In short, the moment, as such, never appears. What then, do we make of it? 
 The present, in its very nature  as  present,  is passing . If the present moment, 
the present Now, were a discrete, isolated, self-contained kernel of time, and the 
future Nows were like this as well, the present Now would be forever waiting, 
and the present would never pass. The present, even at its most abstract, must 
be  contemporaneous with its past, it must be  passing . Here we call upon Deleuze: 
“If the present did not pass of its own accord, if it had to wait for a new present 
in order to become past, the past in general would never be constituted in time, 
and this particular present would not pass.” 70 Or as Kierkegaard (in the voice of 
 70  Gilles Deleuze,  Nietzsche et la philosophie  (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962); 
 Nietzsche and Philosophy , trans. Hugh Tomlinson (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1983), 48.  
447
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
Haufniensis), says, there is no  foothold to be found in the passage of time. 71 
The present can only become past insofar as the past reaches into the present, as 
it comes to be, as it becomes. This means that the present can only become past 
insofar as the past reaches  through  the present, into the future, drawing the future 
into itself. Likewise, the future can only become past insofar as it at the same 
time reaches, through the present, into the past. Experience con ﬁ rms this: though 
from a re ﬂ ective standpoint (and, we should add, on the basis of a presupposed 
traditional, punctilinear model of time), my keystroke  appears punctuated, 
momentary, instantaneous, I in fact know that this is not the case. If I, for 
instance, slow my typing down, and immerse myself in the awareness of my 
typing, I  ﬁ nd that my keystrokes are continuous,  ﬂ uid. There is a time that passes 
as my  ﬁ nger presses the key down to the computer, thereby pushing the relevant 
button underneath, and releases. All of this is to say, the present, as such, is 
never  given . To insist upon the necessity, the structural and essential necessity, 
of the primal impression, as a punctuated now-point or source-point, is to 
presuppose the very model of time which Husserl’s discovery of the living 
present forbids. 72  
 And yet, in another sense entirely, the present is  all that is given. I cannot  relive 
or  remember my past, except in the present. I cannot make plans, set goals, etc., for 
the future,  except in the present. Re ﬂ ection and expectation can only  take place in 
the context of a living, present, moment. So as we have already established, the 
present  as such is never given, and yet, the present is all that  is. This presents us with 
an apparent paradox: the present  is not , and yet, the present  is all that is . But it 
appears as paradoxical only because of the extreme dif ﬁ culty we have with thinking 
time in a non-linear manner, where  time is understood as a line, comprised of an 
in ﬁ nite amount of discrete points, called  moments , and the past, present, and future 
are the dimensions of this line of time. On this model, a  present , whether  now ,  then , 
or  to come , has a self-contained identity as a  point of time. If this is the case, the 
present cannot both  be and  not be. The paradox that has arisen thus forces us to 
rethink the present itself. What has made itself apparent is that the present is not 
given as a punctuated  instant , but rather, the present  is  nothing more than the 
relationality of past to future, future to past. 73 
 This relationality is not the passive,  empirical  relation between two pre-established 
 identities , a future that  just is , and a past that  just is . Rather, this relationality is itself 
productive. The past reaches into the future in such a way that, as it reaches, it 
thereby  gives birth to the future itself. Let us examine, by eidetic variation, our 
 71  Søren Kierkegaard,  Begrebet Angest. En simpel psychologisk-paapegende Overveielse i Retning 
of det dogmatiske Problem om Arvesynden af Vigilius Haufniensis (Copenhagen: Reitzel, 1844); 
The Concept of Anxiety , ed., trans. Reidar Thomte in collaboration with Albert B. Anderson, 
 Kierkegaard’s Writings, Vol. VIII (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), 85. 
 72  I do not here deal with, but am very sensitive to, Derrida’s emphasis on the importance of the 
 presence of the present  for Husserl, as discussed extensively in  Voice and Phenomenon , and in all 
of his Husserl writings. I shall deal with this in a future paper. 
 73  See Deleuze,  Difference and Repetition , 76. 
448
V.W. Cisney
concept of protention. The examples we have used thus far are mundane, everyday 
examples (awaiting the bus, hitting keys on a keyboard, etc.). But these everyday 
examples are predicated upon a more basic and fundamental structure of openness, 
the experience of futurality itself. It is only on the basis of futurality that I can 
 anticipate anything at all. But futurality itself is not the expectation of  anything in 
particular, but rather the mere expectation of a future, an openness to the new, to the 
 coming , that is constituted, lived, indeed birthed, in each present moment, as resulting 
from its past. The relationality that constitutes the present pro-duces its future, 
pro-duces this structural experience of openness. 
 What, then, of the past? On the traditional, punctilinear model of time, the past 
is comprised of the  presents that  are no more . But on our understanding of the living 
present, nothing could be further from the truth. The past  is , and  forevermore shall be . 
Let us analyze the experience of memory, the death of a loved one, for instance. 
When someone we love dies, it is wholly inaccurate to say that this event  is no more . 
On the contrary, this event  is , and  will be , for the duration of the life of the organism. 
A painful romance, a heartbreak, a divorce, the birth of a child, a wedding day,  the 
event , is not  gone ; it is what is  pro-duced (from the Latin—“ pro ” meaning “bringing 
forth” and “ ducere ” meaning “guide” or “lead”), brought forth or led forward, by 
the future in its coming. The past,  from the future, perpetually meets consciousness 
in its present. As the future comes to pass, it produces the past, and this past forever 
runs simultaneously parallel, and intertwined with, the future in its coming. The 
past relates to the future in such a way that its events make possible the future as 
such; and in like manner, the future constitutes the past. Both are intertwined in, and 
constituted by, the present in its productive relationality. “The present alone exists,” 74 
but it exists always and only as the productive relationality constituting simultane-
ously its dually intertwined dimensions of future and past. 
 Conclusion: A Philosophy of the Future 
 Philosophy is and must be ontology; of this there can be no doubt. Philosophy is the 
attempt to think Being, the fundamental. Even in its myriad forms, it is forever 
distinguished from the sciences by its pursuit of the fundamental: philosophy of art 
is  not  art history; philosophy of physics is  not  physics; political philosophy is  not 
political science; philosophy of  ﬁ lm is  not  ﬁ lm theory. Philosophy’s revelations are, 
according to Husserl, “ metaphysical , if it be true that the ultimate cognitions of 
being should be called metaphysical.” 75 The  ultimate cognitions of being on Husserl’s 
account overcome the traditional dualistic metaphysics that forever damns philosophy 
to the backseat with epistemology at the wheel—because Husserl puts thought at 
the very heart of being. Being, we realize in the shadow of Husserl, is the fundamental 
 74  Ibid. 
 75  Husserl,  Cartesian Meditations , §60. 
449
26 Jacques Derrida and the Future
structure of life itself, which we, in agreement with Husserl, identi ﬁ ed as essentially 
temporalizing: Being is productive relationality. 
 What then does a philosophy of the future in the shadow of Husserl look like? 
It must be,  ﬁ rst and foremost, ontology. But in its ontological pursuits, it must vigilantly 
avoid the trappings of traditional essentialist metaphysics, metaphysics of identity, 
of centrality, of presence, which continually tempts the thinker with its promises of 
the universal. Philosophy must attempt to think Being in its very  sense as productive 
relationality, without compromise, as what fundamentally opens thought to the 
experience of the new, even in its manifestations as  past .  Without compromise , that 
is to say,  as nothing but compromise , as compromising is a “promising together.” 
In its productive relationality, its difference, Being promises itself in the dual futu-
ricity of past and future. In the shadow of Husserl, a philosophy of the future is a 
philosophy  of the future. 
451
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_27, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 Deleuze on  Ideen I 
 While Deleuze speaks about phenomenology in virtually all of his books, his 1969 
 Logique du sens contains the most sustained discussion of it. 1 As the title of the 
book suggests, what is at issue is sense. Sense is at issue in  Logique du sens because 
what Deleuze wants to do is depose the old metaphysical essences, replace them 
with sense. In other words, by deposing the essences, he wants to bring about a 
reversal of Platonism. Deleuze recognizes that, through the  epochē and reduction, 
phenomenology amounts to a version of anti-Platonism. Thus he readily tells us that 
what  Logique du sens concerns is what Husserl calls “sense donation” (LS 89/71). 
Deleuze’s question is: how is sense produced, given over, or generated (without 
relying on second worldly essences or forms, without relying on God, without being 
metaphysical)? The logic of sense then is a logic of genesis. 2 What is “true genesis,” 
how are we to determine the “transcendental  ﬁ eld” (LS 128/105)? 
 For Deleuze, there are four requirements for a true genesis. What is required for 
genesis is that sense (or that which generates sense) must generate (or at least 
account for and condition) the other dimensions of what appears to be the primary 
 L.  Lawlor (*)
 Department of Philosophy ,  Penn State University ,  University Park ,  PA ,  USA 
e-mail:  lul19@psu.edu 
 Chapter 27 
 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak 
 Leonard  Lawlor   
 1  Gilles Deleuze,  Logique du sens (Paris: Minuit, 1969); English translation by Mark Lester with 
Charles Stivale, edited by Constantin Boundas as  Logic of Sense (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1990). Hereafter cited with the abbreviation LS, with reference  ﬁ rst to the French, then to 
the English translation. 
 2  Here we are focusing only on what Deleuze calls “static genesis,” that is, the operation by which 
the de ﬁ nition of the conditions of a problem generates a solution or solutions. See Gilles Deleuze, 
 Différence et répétition (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968), 238; English translation by 
Paul Patton as  Difference and Repetition (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 183. 
452
L. Lawlor
element in discourse, the proposition. That is, sense must generate (1) the states of 
affairs denoted by the proposition (denotation); (2) the signi ﬁ ed concepts and classes 
of the proposition (signi ﬁ cation); and (3) the states of the subject manifested by the 
proposition (manifestation). All of these elements of the proposition are elements of 
belief, of  doxa . This comment brings us to the fourth requirement: a genuine or true 
genesis must not duplicate  doxa (or opinion) in the genetic source. Thus, the genetic 
source—sense—must be neutral in regard to all the modes of the proposition, and 
yet it must be productive. 
 Deleuze is interested in phenomenology because, as he says “phenomenology 
[might] be the rigorous science” of sense. 3 To determine whether phenomenology is 
this “rigorous science,” Deleuze focuses on Husserl’s 1913  Ideen I and, making use 
of Paul Ricœur’s 1950 French translation, he cites or alludes to the following speci ﬁ c 
sections: 88, 89, 90, 98, 99, and 124 (on the noema); 103 and 104 (on  Urdoxa ); 110 
and 114 (on neutrality modi ﬁ cation); and 129, 135 and 143 (on the Idea in the 
Kantian sense). 4 Deleuze sees that Husserl seems to “discover sense” through the 
idea of the noema. 5 As the Greek word indicates (from “ noein ,” to think), the noema 
is the thought-object, which is correlated to what Husserl calls “noesis” (thinking). 
 3  (LS 33/21) By calling phenomenology a “rigorous science,” Deleuze of course is referring to well 
known essay by Husserl: “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” (1911). 
 4  Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 
Erstes Buch. Husserliana Band III (Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950); English translation by Fred 
Kersten as  Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, 
First Book (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983); French translation by Paul Ricœur as  Idées direc-
trices pour une phénoménologie (Paris: Tel Gallimard, 1950). Kersten’s translation is made from 
the Husserliana volume, while Ricœur’s is made from the third edition (1928) of the original Max 
Niemeyer publication. The  ﬁ rst English translation (by Boyce Gibson) was also made from the 
Niemeyer edition. See Edmund Husserl,  Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology , 
trans. W. R. Boyce Gibson (New York: Collier Books, 1975 [1931]). 
 5  (LS 117/96, also LS 45/32) The criticism that Deleuze presents here in  Logique du sens should be 
compared to the one Derrida presents at basically the same time. In an early essay, “‘Genesis and 
Structure,’ and Phenomenology,” Derrida, like Deleuze, recognizes the innovation that the Husserlian 
idea of noema represents. Yet, Derrida, again like Deleuze, thinks that Husserl retreats from this inno-
vation insofar as Husserl conceives history as teleological (the Idea in the Kantian sense). In  La Voix 
et le phénomène , Derrida might appear at  ﬁ rst to be at odds with Deleuze since in this book Derrida 
criticizes the Husserlian idea of expression. Yet, what Derrida criticizes is the restriction that the 
Husserlian concept of expression seems to impose on sense. In other words, like Deleuze, Derrida 
conceives sense as an in ﬁ nite (unlimited becoming), not to be reined in by a  telos of “the relation to an 
object” (the idea in the Kantian sense again). Derrida sees the unlimited nature of sense in what 
Husserl calls indication ( Anzeichen ), rather than in expression. Neither Derrida nor Deleuze are 
satis ﬁ ed respectively with Husserl’s difference between and the conception of indication and expres-
sion. The lack of satisfaction implies a community of conception between Derrida and Deleuze. Notice 
in this formula of a “relation to the object,” we see the dative. Derrida’s criticism of “the relation to the 
object” implies that he does accept the dative relation. He cannot therefore be easily classi ﬁ ed among 
the so-called “philosophers of transcendence.” The other (of any sort) is internal and not a transcen-
dence that puts a break (not a stopping point) on becoming. Both Derrida and Deleuze are thinkers of 
in ﬁ nite, continuous variation (multiplicity or dissemination). See Jacques Derrida, “‘Genèse et struc-
ture’ et la phénoménologie,”  L’Ecriture et la différence (Paris: Seuil, 1967), 229–52, especially, 
242–44; English translation by Alan Bass as  Writing and Difference (Chicago: University of Chicago, 
453
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
At  ﬁ rst glance, it seems, according to Deleuze, that the noema satis ﬁ es the requirements 
for a true genesis. Husserl distinguishes the noema from the physical object, from 
the psychological or lived experience, from mental representations, and from logical 
concepts. In other words, the noema differs from denotation, manifestation, and 
signi ﬁ cation. It does not seem to resemble what it is supposed to generate; it looks 
to be “independent” and “neutral” in regard to all the primary elements of the propo-
sition (LS 123/101, also LS 45/32). 
 Deleuze, however, argues that the Husserlian genesis does not really satisfy the 
four requirements of true genesis. His criticism of Husserl takes place in  three steps 
(across the “Fourteenth Series” and the “Fifteenth Series” in  Logique du sens ). First, 
Deleuze notices that, when Husserl discusses the noema (in §§90, 99, and especially 
in §129 6 ), he uses the image of a core; the noema or sense has, according to Husserl, 
a nucleus. The image suggests that the exterior or periphery of the nucleus is only 
an appearance. As Deleuze says, “Nucleus metaphors are disquieting; they envelope 
what is in question” (LS 120/98). What Husserl has done, according to Deleuze, is 
determine the nucleus as a “predicate” (LS 118/97). Determining sense as a predicate 
(the greenness of the tree in the proposition “the tree is green”), Husserl understands 
the nucleus as a concept or a generality. Yet, the concept or generality is what is 
found in the meaning of the proposition. If sense is a generality, then it gives itself, 
ready-made, the form of signi ﬁ cation—rather than generating it. The nucleus of 
sense, being determined as a generality, is related, for Husserl, to “a something = X,” 
which is an object in general. But such a general object is also what allows the 
proposition to refer to something. So, as Deleuze stresses, just as signi ﬁ cation is 
given ahead of time ready-made, denotation is given ahead of time ready-made. 
In relation to both signi ﬁ cation and denotation, the donation of sense remains within 
a “vicious circle” (LS 128/105). 
 Second , Deleuze stresses that Husserl determines the something = X as an Idea in 
the Kantian sense (an approximation to an ideal). By determining the something = X 
as an idea in the Kantian sense, Husserl maintains reason as the basic form of gen-
esis. More precisely, by maintaining reason, Husserl seems to be presupposing “an 
originary faculty of common sense”; the originary faculty of common sense accounts 
for the identity of the object in general (the identity is what is held in common by 
all the possible objects) (LS 119/97, also LS 141/116, LS 144/119). According to 
Deleuze, Husserl even seems to be assuming a good sense; good sense (this is the 
Idea in the Kantian sense as a  telos ) accounts for the process of identi ﬁ cation of all 
the objects in general to in ﬁ nity (the process is always seeking the identi ﬁ cation of 
1978), 154–68, especially, 162–63. Jacques Derrida,  La Voix et le phénomène (Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1983 [1967]), Introduction and Chapter 7, especially, 100; English trans-
lation by Leonard Lawlor as  Voice and Phenomenon (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 
2011), Introduction and Chapter 7, especially, 76. 
 6  Ricœur renders Husserl’s “ Kern ” with French “ noyau ”; Kersten renders “ Kern ” in English as 
“core.” The English translators of  Logique du sens render “ noyau ” as “nucleus.” The old Boyce 
Gibson translation of  Ideen I uses “nucleus” to render “ Kern .” We are using “nucleus” here, which 
allows one to see the image better. 
454
L. Lawlor
all objects as if that identi ﬁ cation is the good). 7 Finally, we come to the  third step. 
Through the assumption of common sense and good sense, Husserl maintains the 
form of consciousness (LS 124/102). Here (in the “Fifteenth Series”), Deleuze 
focuses on what Husserl says in  Ideen I about neutrality modi ﬁ cation (he refers to 
§§110 and 114) (LS 124/102, also LS 147–48/122). Husserl divides consciousness—
a “radical separation”—between actual doxic (or believing) consciousness, which is 
productive (it posits that something exists and makes judgments), and a merely 
“thinking of” consciousness, which is neutral and non-productive (its neutrality 
means that it posits no existence and makes no judgments). 8 Actual consciousness 
(or the actual  cogito ) is under the “jurisdiction of reason,” while the “merely thinking 
of” consciousness is not. Deleuze stresses that Husserl determines the relation 
between the two kinds of consciousness as a relation of proper and improper and he 
provides an image of this relation. For Husserl, the neutral, that is, improper 
consciousness is the shadow, while the proper and rational consciousness is the 
thing that casts the shadow. Thus, according to Deleuze, Husserl, through the 
“separation,” makes a “disjunction” within consciousness, endowing the form of 
actual consciousness with the potency of genesis (productivity), while the neutralized 
consciousness has no productive potency. However, in order to have true genesis, 
the generating agency—in this case consciousness—must at once be neutral (that is, 
independent of the modes of consciousness manifested in propositions) and productive. 
Overall therefore, in these three steps, what Deleuze shows is that the forms of  doxa 
(the nucleus of  proto-doxa ), the form of reason (common sense and good sense 
through the Idea in the Kantian sense), and the form of consciousness (proper and 
actual consciousness) are used as the genetic source and then these same forms 
appear in what is generated. In other words, Husserl’s account of the genesis of 
sense is false; it is a “sleight of hand;” (LS 118/97) Husserl’s genesis occurs only in 
“appearance” (LS 122/100). 
 Although we have just gone through a complicated argument, Deleuze’s criticism 
of phenomenology is reducible to one claim: phenomenology misunderstands the 
genuine nature of the reversal of Platonism. In order to reverse Platonism, one 
must not, of course, return to the old metaphysical essences. Not returning to 
metaphysical essences, one must conceive the genetic source as immanent, but―
this is an important “but”—immanence does not mean sameness. Platonism has 
not been truly reversed if the genetic source is the same as what it generates (the 
form of consciousness is the same for all psychological consciousnesses, the form 
of general concepts is the same as all particulars meanings, and the object in general 
is the same for all particular objects). However, just as immanence does not mean 
sameness, the difference of the genetic source from the generated does turn the 
 7  (LS 119/97) The de ﬁ nition of good sense given in  Logique du sens is: “good sense af ﬁ rms that in all 
things there is a determinable sense or direction” (LS 9/1). Deleuze frequently refers to good sense 
and common sense. The most thorough discussion occurs in  Difference and Repetition , Chapter 3.  
 8  Kersten renders Husserl’s “ radikalen Scheidung ” as “radical separation”; Ricœur renders it as 
“ coupure radicale .” Deleuze then uses “ coupure radicale ,” which is rendered in the English 
translation of  Logique du sens as “radical cleavage” (LS 124/102). 
455
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
genetic source into an abyss. For Deleuze, to reverse Platonism truly, one must not 
descend into the depth of chaos. What then does it mean to reverse Platonism? As 
Deleuze says, “To reverse Platonism is  ﬁ rst and foremost to depose essences and 
to substitute events in their place, as emissions of singularities” (LS 69/53). Sense 
must be understood not as a predicate (or concept), not as a generality (or object 
in general), and not as a form, but as an  event : “The splendor and magni ﬁ cence of 
the event is sense” (LS 175/149).  
 Implications of Hearing-Oneself-Speak 
 Introduction 
 All of us know Nietzsche’s simple de ﬁ nition of the reversal of Platonism. To reverse 
Platonism means that we value this world in itself, immanently, and no longer value 
it in relation to transcendent forms such as the good. In other words, the revaluation 
of existence means that existence is measured neither in terms of an origin from 
which existence might be said to have fallen nor in terms of an end toward which 
existence might be said to be advancing. More precisely, we must say that the reversal 
of Platonism means that the duration of existence has no beginning and it has no 
end. It has no primary origin and no ultimate destination. In the reversal, the time of 
duration becomes unlimited, and time itself looks to be composed of nothing but 
fragments and remainders. While we started out from a well-known de ﬁ nition of the 
reversal of Platonism, we have ended up in a very complicated idea. The reversal of 
Platonism leads us to the idea of time imagined as a line that has no terminal points, 
a line that never bends itself back into a circle. It leads us to the imagination of an 
unlimited straight line. It seems to me that, despite all the re ﬂ ections on time that 
have taken place across the twentieth century, the implications of the idea of unlimited 
time remain, at the least, under-determined, and, more likely, I think, the implications 
remain largely unknown. 
 In the twentieth century, Deleuze of course is the great philosopher of the reversal 
of Platonism. In his 1968  Différence et répétition , he assigns the reversal of Platonism 
as the task of contemporary philosophy. 9 It is, however, in his 1969  Logique du sens 
that Deleuze gives us the most precise de ﬁ nition of the reversal of Platonism. 
There, he says, “To reverse Platonism is  ﬁ rst and foremost to depose essences and 
to substitute  events in their place” (LS 69/53). Thus, if Deleuze is the great philosopher 
of the reversal of Platonism, he is also, by means of this de ﬁ nition, the great thinker 
of the event. The question that therefore drives the investigation in which we shall 
engage is: what is an event? As we shall see, we arrive at an answer to the question 
of event only if we conceive the event in terms of the straight, unlimited line of time. 
That is, we know we have experienced an event when the two questions of its 
 9  Deleuze,  Différence et répétition , 82;  Difference and Repetition , 59. 
456
L. Lawlor
primary origin and its ultimate destination are and remain necessarily unanswerable. 
In other words, an event is happening when we cannot say with certainty of an event 
what happened and what is going to happen. In fact, if one  can answer these questions, 
then one knows that one has not  really experienced an event. And if one thinks one 
can answer these questions, then one has not really broken free of Platonism. 
 The essay you are about to read contains many echoes of and allusions to the works 
and Ideen of Gilles Deleuze and Jacques Derrida, and some to Heidegger. Yet, its 
purpose does not lie in producing yet another commentary on their works. Instead, the 
essay attempts to appropriate their thinking in a way that will open up new possibilities 
of thinking and acting. What must be appropriated is immanence since, of course, 
both Derrida and Deleuze, and especially Deleuze, begin their thinking in immanence. 
While this point is not often recognized, and despite their well-known criticisms of 
phenomenology, both Derrida and Deleuze belong  ﬁ rmly within the phenomenological 
tradition. Thus, in order to understand what immanence means, we are going to start 
with internal, subjective experience. After all, it is impossible to reverse Platonism 
without passing through a phase of Cartesianism. The phase of Cartesianism means 
that we must examine the “ cogito ,” or, in Greek, it means that we must examine 
“ dianoia .” The Greek term here brings us to the  ﬁ rst of our four reference points in 
Plato himself. Perhaps it is surprising to see us turn so quickly to Plato when all we 
have spoken of is the reversal of Platonism. Yet, as Deleuze has pointed out, Plato 
himself was the  ﬁ rst philosopher to begin the movement of the reversal of Platonism. 10 
Our  ﬁ rst reference point is the  Theatetus (189c–190a). Here Plato says (through 
Socrates, of course) that thinking is interior monologue. To de ﬁ ne thinking as interior 
monologue means that thinking is equivalent to the experience of hearing-oneself-speak. 
Therefore what we shall engage in  ﬁ rst is a phenomenology of hearing-oneself-speak. 
By means of this phenomenology, we shall be able to approach the de ﬁ nition of the 
reversal of Platonism in terms of the event.  
 The Phenomenology of Hearing-Oneself-Speak 
and Some of Its Implications 
 If this investigation is to be a genuine phenomenological investigation, we must 
enact the  epochē . In agreement with the  epochē , we turn back from the objects of 
our experience to the experience itself. Following the basic trajectory of the 
phenomenological movement, we must not stop with the  epochē . We must radicalize 
it with the universalization of the transcendental reduction. 11 Through its strict 
 10  Gilles Deleuze, “Platon et le simulacre,”  Logique du sens , 292–306; “Plato and the Simulacrum,” 
 The Logic of Sense , 253–65. 
 11  The discussion of epoché and the reduction is based on Edmund Husserl, “A. Abhandlungen. Der 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Artikel,” in  Phänomenologische Psychologie  (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1968), 277–301; English translation in  Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology 
and the Confrontation with Heidegger  (1927–1931), translated and edited by Thomas Sheehan and 
457
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
universalization, the reduction relates all beings, that is, all constituted things, 
including me as a psychological subject, back to an experience that is itself 
extra-psychological and even pre-ontic. The universalization of the reduction takes 
us therefore to a level of experience that is non-existent and “ultra-transcendental.” 12 
Through the universalization of the reduction, what we experience resembles nothing 
that we grasped in the natural experience of objects or beings or things. What has 
come into view, where have we landed due to the universal reduction? Below the 
functioning of the natural experience of objects, we  ﬁ nd  pure  auto-affection. As we 
anticipated, at  ﬁ rst glance pure auto-affection looks to be interior monologue, 
hearing-oneself-speak. 
 Now, let us pursue the investigation of the pure auto-affection of hearing-
oneself-speak. 13 Auto-affection  seems  to include two aspects.  First , I seem to hear 
myself speak at the very moment that I speak; and,  second , I seem to hear my own self 
speak. The question we must ask is clear: is it really the case that in hearing-oneself-speak, 
one hears oneself speak  at this very moment  and that one really hears  one’s own self? 
In other words, is auto-affection really that pure? What we are going to pay particular 
attention to in the investigation is these “seems.” This is how auto-affection seems to 
take place. When I engage in interior monologue, when, in short, thinking takes 
place—it seems as though I hear myself speak at the very moment I speak. It seems as 
though my interior voice is not required to pass outside of myself, as though it is not 
required to traverse any space. So, my interior monologue seems to be immediate, 
immediately present, and not to involve anyone else. Interior monologue seems therefore 
to be different from the experience of me speaking to another. 
 However, are we really, truly able to distinguish and separate interior monologue 
from external dialogue? When I speak in general, that is, with or without the intention 
of communication, some moment always comes prior to the speaking. The prior 
moment could be silence or noise, but something like a context precedes all speaking. 
The prior context implies that the present speaking, whether it is internal or external, 
whether it has the purpose of communication or not, is in a secondary position. 
The present speaking is necessarily a “second.” In a few moments, below, by means 
Richard E. Palmer (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997), 159–79. It is also based on 
the presentation of the phenomenological method in  Ideen I . Edmund Husserl,  Ideen zu einer 
reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Erstes Buch. Husserliana Band 
III  (Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950); English translation by Fred Kersten as  Ideen pertaining to a 
Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book (The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1983). For a lucid and exhaustive treatment of the “Encyclopedia Britannica” essay, see 
Joseph J. Kockelmans,  Edmund Husserl’s Phenomenology  (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University 
Press, 1994).  
 12  I have appropriated the term “ultra-transcendental” from Derrida. See Derrida,  La voix et le 
phénomène , 14;  Voice and Phenomenon , 23. 
 13  In the investigation that follows, I am engaged clearly in a traditional phenomenological study 
such as the one taken up by Dan Zahavi in his  Self-Awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological 
Investigation  (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1999). However, this investigation 
takes its inspiration from Derrida, in particular, from the sixth chapter of  Voice and Phenomenon . 
Unlike Zahavi, I do not think that “Derrida’s formulations are too excessive” (133). 
458
L. Lawlor
of an eidetic variation, I shall attempt to demonstrate this claim about the necessity 
of the secondary position of present speaking. For now, however, we must recognize 
that the necessity is this: whenever I start to speak—to myself, to others, for the sake 
of any kind of phonation whatsoever—I  ﬁ nd that some other speaking has already 
taken place and elapsed. 
 There is always some elapsed moment that has expired, that has been lost and 
reduced to silence, even as something of that elapsed moment has been retained, 
even as something of it remains. Necessarily, my speaking is not a pure  ﬁ rst time, 
even though it takes place right now. The secondary character of all speaking means 
that there is a delay between one speaking and another. This delay then functions as 
well in between speaking and hearing. Just as the apparent initiating speaking is in 
truth a “second,” the hearing of the speaking is not immediate. In other words, the 
delay in interior monologue means that interior monologue is always involved in a 
process of mediation. We must therefore conclude from this description that my 
interior monologue in fact resembles my experience of external speech, in which a 
distance separates me from my hearer. I cannot, it is impossible for me to hear 
myself  immediately . Regardless of whether the action is hearing or speaking, the 
action is a response to the past. 
 Similar to the  ﬁ rst necessity of the delay in time, we encounter another necessity. 
This second necessity appears despite the radicalization of the reduction, despite the 
universal bracketing of all natural beings. Here it is. In order to hear myself speak at 
this very moment, I must make use of the same phonemes as I use in communication 
(even if this monologue is not vocalized externally through my mouth, even if it 
does not have the purpose of communication). It is an irreducible or essential necessity 
that the silent words I form contain repeatable traits. This irreducible necessity 
means that, when I speak to myself, I speak with the sounds of others. In other 
words, it means that I  ﬁ nd in myself other voices, which come from the past: the 
many voices are in me. I cannot, it is impossible for me to hear myself speak  all 
alone . There is always a very quiet “murmur” coming from the past. 14 Others’ voices 
contaminate the hearing of myself speaking. 15  Just as my present moment is never 
immediate, my interior monologue is never simply my own. 
 As I said earlier, I think that the implications of this description are unclear. 
Therefore, my presentation of its implications here are by no means exhaustive. 
First, I think that the description shows, fundamentally, that auto-affection is based 
 14  Maurice Blanchot, “Mort du dernier écrivain,”  Le livre à venir (Paris: Folio Essais Gallimard, 
1959), 301–302; English translation by Charlotte Mandel as “Death of the Last Writer,”  The Book 
to Come (Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press, 2003), 222–23. Merleau-Ponty cites this text 
in  L’institution, la passivité. Notes de cours au Collège de France (1954–1955) (Paris: Éditions 
Belin, 2003), 200–201; English translation by Leonard Lawlor and Heath Massey as  Institution 
and Passivity (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2010), 151–52. 
 15  Fred Evans has developed an important conception of the voice in  The Multivoiced Body: Society 
and Communication in the Age of Diversity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2008), see 
especially 144–68 and 280–82. 
459
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
on a structure that consists of two contradictory forces. 16 On the one hand, there is 
always a present moment, a point or a singularization. Each thought I have, as I speak 
it, has a kind of novelty to it, giving it a singular location. It is important to realize 
that what makes the singular point novel is that its appearance is haphazard and 
determined by chance. Undoubtedly, this  ﬁ rst force of singularization is the root of 
what we naturally call an event-like experience. Yet, this experience is not the expe-
rience of the event. It is only the experience of an accident, an accident due to the 
mixed up way in which the singular points succeed one another. As we shall see, 
more is required for an event than an accident. Now, let us turn to the other force in 
the structure we have been examining. Beside the singularizing force of chance, 
there is the universalizing force of repetition. As the description showed, the 
singularity of a thought, my present interior speech, is always connected back to 
some other thoughts in the past or its location is connected back to some other 
places elsewhere. Because of this necessary inseparability of the present thought to 
past thoughts, the present thought is necessarily composed of traits already used in 
the past, traits standing nearby. These traits are necessarily repeatable to in ﬁ nity. 
The structure we have discovered therefore consists of the force of singularization 
and the force of universalization. These two forces of universalization and singular-
ization are irreducibly connected to one another but without uni ﬁ cation. In other 
words, these two forces are necessarily bound to one another and necessarily dis-uni ﬁ ed. 
The paradoxical relation of the two forces implies that auto-affection is really, 
necessarily, at the same time, hetero-affection. The paradox is that the relation is 
heterogeneous and yet the alterity does not make a separation. The inseparability is a 
distribution of the unity into a duality. Or, more precisely, insofar as a new now is 
always, necessarily linked to repetition, the unity is distributed into a multiplicity. 
 The wording of this last formula for the structure implied in the description of 
hearing-oneself-speak (that is, “the one distributed into a multiplicity”) brings us to 
our second landmark in Plato’s dialogues: the ancient problem of the one and the 
many in the labyrinthine discourse of the  Parmenides . Here, Parmenides presents 
astonishing arguments that support the description of the structure we have just laid 
out: the one is the same as the many insofar as it is different from them, and unlike 
the many insofar as the one is the same as the many. 17 However, also in the 
 Parmenides , we  ﬁ nd this argument. It concerns the one touching itself, and therefore 
it concerns auto-affection. Parmenides argues that, if the one were to touch itself, it 
would have to be situated next to itself (148e). Yet, Parmenides counters by saying 
that the one does not have this “next to itself” distance since it is not two. He concludes 
that since it is not two, it cannot touch itself. In the structure we have been outlining, 
 16  The description of hearing-oneself-speak and its implications have evolved out of years of 
re ﬂ ection upon Derrida’s  Voice and Phenomenon , especially on its introduction and chapter 6. 
 17  (147c–148c) I have used both the Fowler English translation and the Cornford English translation 
of the  Parmenides . Plato, “Parmenides,” trans. F. M. Cornford,  The Collected Dialogues of Plato , 
eds. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1961). 
Plato,  Cratylus, Parmenides, Greater Hippias, Lesser Hippias , trans. Harold North Fowler 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1939). 
460
L. Lawlor
however, the one of the “auto” is necessarily distanced from itself and distributed 
into two. So, according to Parmenides’ argumentation, we must be able to say that, 
since the structure is a “two,” the structure in some way touches itself or makes 
contact with itself. How are we to understand this self-contact of the two forces? 
 We said that the two forces are contradictory. The terms with which we designated 
the two forces clearly indicate their contradictory character: the one is the force of 
singularization, while the second is the force of universalization. The contradictory 
character of the two forces means that the two are in competition with one another, 
the one overstepping the other. We might imagine the competition as a race, with the 
two forces going beyond one another on a straight line. But, the image of the compe-
tition does not really emphasis the back and forth of the two forces; it does not really 
capture the idea of them as forces. Therefore we could also imagine contradictory 
character as a kind of transgression, as a border-crossing. If we understand the “contra” 
of “contradiction” in its logical sense, then we must say that the two forces are the 
negation of one another. 
 Or, taking up Heidegger’s discourse on the “ Ereignis ,” we could say that, even 
though the two forces are appropriate ( geeignet ) to one another, the one dis-appro-
priates ( enteignen ) itself into the other. Through the language of appropriation and 
disappropriation, we have retained the negative relation. But also we see now that 
the relation between the two forces—the one dis-appropriates itself into the other 
like an infection—is one of “pain.” 18 The two forces are trying to annihilate one 
another. The self-contact of the two forces is a struggle, and the distance between 
them is not a threshold (as Heidegger would say), but a battle ﬁ eld. Therefore by 
pursuing the implications of the description of auto-affection, we have entered into 
what we could call, following Deleuze, chaos, or, following Derrida, we could call 
it fundamental violence. 19 
 The paradoxical relation of the two forces has taken us very far from the apparently 
peaceful experience of my own interior monologue. In light of how far we have 
come, how should we now characterize the experience? Not only did we speak of 
the two forces in terms of contradiction, but also we spoke of them in terms of 
necessities. Indeed, could there be a force that did not build up and demand or even 
command its discharge? It is as if the forces are saying to one another: “Singularize! 
No, universalize!” and “Universalize! No, singularize!” These two commandments 
 18  These comments on Heidegger and the  Ereignis are based on a reading of his 1950 “Die Sprache,” 
Martin Heidegger,  Gesamtausgabe, Band 12, Unterwegs zur Sprache (Frankfurt am Main: 
Klostermann, 1976), 25. The essay “Die Sprache” has been translated into English by Albert 
Hofstader as “Language,”  Poetry, Language, Thought  (New York: Harper Collins, 2001), 203. 
I have developed an in-depth reading of Heidegger’s “Language” essay in my  Early Twentieth 
Century Continental Philosophy (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2011). 
 19  For chaos, see Deleuze,  Logique du sens , 129–31;  Logic of Sense , 106–107. See also Gilles Deleuze 
and Félix Guattari,  Qu’est-ce que la philosophie? (Paris: Minuit, 1991), 44–45; English translation by 
Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell as  What is Philosophy? (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1994), 42. For fundamental violence, see Jacques Derrida, “Violence et métaphysique,” 
 L’écriture et la différence, 117–227, especially, 171–72 and 191–92; English translation by Alan Bass 
as “Violence and Metaphysics,”  Writing and Difference , 79–153, especially, 116–17 and 130–31.  
461
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
must be obeyed, and yet they cannot be obeyed. In other words, the two commandments 
cannot be reconciled. The impossibility of reconciliation tells us how to characterize 
the experience we have entered into. It is the experience of injustice. It is impossible 
to make the relation right or just. Does the experience of the impossibility of justice 
imply that the two forces are  strong , too strong not to be obeyed? The answer to this 
question will not only reveal one more way to characterize the experience, but it will 
also tell us something about the forces themselves. 
 We must return to the structure which the description of auto-affection implies. 
What de ﬁ nes the structure is the necessary inseparability of the two forces. A moment 
ago, I said that I think that an eidetic variation would be able to demonstrate the 
necessity of the present speaking coming second, as if it is always a response to the 
past. You can see in this wording—“always a response to the past”—that the eidetic 
variation really concerns the experience of time. 20  So let us imagine any experience 
in any domain. We could imagine an experience in the domain of the everyday, in the 
practical, the arts, the theoretical sciences, or in mathematics. No matter what 
the experience and no matter what the domain, we see that, each and every time, the 
experience involves a before and an after. As we imagine a variety of experiences, we 
never  ﬁ nd an experience in which there is a before with no other before prior to it; 
likewise, we never  ﬁ nd an after that does not have another after coming later than it. 
In other words, it is not possible to imagine a present moment or a now-point that 
does not come after a previous point and that does not remember a past moment. No 
matter what now-point I think of, there is always a prior retention. 
 Likewise, it is not possible to imagine a retention that does not come before and 
that does not anticipate another now-point. In other words, there is no repetition 
without the supervenience of a singularity and there is no singularity without the 
supervenience of universality. If this imaginative exercise has disclosed a truth about 
the structure, then we must say that, within the structure, it is impossible to speak of 
 20  Although I am using a method from classical phenomenology, I am trying to make the method 
have an effect not just on the objective side of the variation but also on the subjective side of the 
variation. In other words, when I vary to determine a structure, I am also trying to make that 
variation change the one engaged in act of variation. I am here following a clue provided by 
Foucault in his course called  L’Hermeneutique du sujet : “Meditating death ( meditari ,  meletan ), 
in the sense that the Greeks and Latins understand this … is placing oneself, in thought, in the 
situation of someone who is in the process of dying, or who is about to die, who is living his last 
days. The meditation is not therefore a game the subject plays on his own thought, with the 
object or possible objects of his thought. It is not something like eidetic variation, as we would 
say in phenomenology. A completely different kind of game is involved: not a game the subject 
plays with his own thought or thoughts, but a game that thought performs on the subject himself. 
It is becoming, through thought, the person who is dying or whose death is imminent.” Michel 
Foucault,  L’Hermeneutique du sujet, Cours au Collège de France, 1981–1982 (Paris: Seuil 
Gallimard, 2001), 342; English translation by Graham Burchell as  The Hermeneutics of the 
Subject: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1981–1982  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), 
359–60. In Husserl, an eidetic variation results in an eidetic intuition. What Foucault is implying 
here is that the phenomenological eidetic intuition does not transform the subject doing the 
variation and having the intuition. In contrast, the intuition I am trying to bring about, like 
meditation in this sense, is supposed to transform the subject.  
462
L. Lawlor
an origin in the traditional sense, a principle (or  arché ), a unitary starting point, 
complete in itself, an unprecedented beginning. Instead, the origin is always  origin-
heterogeneous , that is, the origin is heterogeneous from the start or what starts is 
itself heterogeneous to the very idea of origin. 21 Likewise, if there is always another 
singularity beyond every repetition, then we cannot speak of an end in the traditional 
sense, a purpose (or  telos ), a unitary stopping point, complete in itself, with nothing 
left over. Instead, the end is always  end-heterogeneous , that is, the end is in the end, 
 ﬁ nally, heterogeneous or what  ﬁ nishes is heterogeneous to the very idea of an end. 
In short, there is no original principle and there is no  ﬁ nal purpose. 
 The lack of an original principle and of a  ﬁ nal purpose always tells us something 
about the forces. A strong force would be one that is based on a principle from 
which it would derive all of its functions or it would be based on a purpose toward 
which it would orient all of its functions. Because the two forces function  without 
an  arché  and  without a  telos , we  cannot describe these forces at the bottom of 
auto-affection as strong. They are  weak  precisely because they are neither archeological 
nor teleological. Yet, despite their weakness, the forces continue to work, to function, 
and to struggle in the depths of the ultra-transcendental. 
 The Experience of the Event 
 We reached the ultra-transcendental level by following the phenomenological 
method of the universal epochē. It was as if we had merely “leaped” out of the natural 
attitude into the depth of the experience, a leap made possible by “our perfect freedom,” 
as Husserl says in  Ideen I (§31). Yet, later in  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaft 
und die transzendentale Phänomenol ogie , Husserl says that this “shorter way” of 
the leap into the transcendental level—this is the Cartesian way, of course—has “a 
great shortcoming.” 22 The shortcoming, for Husserl, lies in the fact that the shorter 
way places us in an experience that seems to lack any content. Then, because it 
lacks content, it is “all too easy right at the beginning to fall back into the naïve-natural 
attitude.” 23 Thus in the Cartesian way, it is not clear that one is not copying the 
 21  I have appropriated “origin-heterogeneous” from Derrida. Jacques Derrida,  De l’esprit (Paris: 
Galilée, 1987), 176–78; English translation by Geoff Bennington and Rachel Bowlby as  Of Spirit 
(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1989), 107–108. 
 22  Edmund Husserl.  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaft und die transzendentale 
Phänomenologie, Husserliana VI (Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976), §43; English translation by 
David Carr as  The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology (Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press, 1970), §43. Ludwig Landgrebe’s “Husserls Abschied vom 
Cartesianismus,”  Der Weg der Phänomenologie (Güntersloh: Gerd Mohr, 1967) helped me a great 
deal in the writing of this paragraph. See Ludwig Landgrebe, “Husserl’s Departure from 
Cartesianism,”  The Phenomenology of Edmund Hussserl , ed. Donn Welton (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1981), 66–121, especially 98–99. 
 23  Husserl.  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaft , §43;  The Crisis of European Sciences and 
Transcendental , §43. 
463
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
transcendental level off the naïve level of natural experience. It is not clear that one 
has escaped a vicious circle. As we further know from  Die Krisis , Husserl thinks 
that a “preparatory explication” of the  epochē is necessary to avoid this shortcoming. 
In other words, we must engage in a criticism of the history of philosophy in order 
to show how the transcendental level differs from all other philosophical positions. 
In short, something like a genealogy is required to show us how to reach the 
ultra-transcendental experience. 
 Yet, in order to escape the vicious circle, something else is required. If the  epochē 
or even the genealogy is taken up on the basis of “our perfect freedom,” it amounts 
to an act of will. In an act of will, one is directed toward something one already has 
a sense of. One projects a series of means in order to reach a goal that one has 
outlined in advance. The will always seems therefore to be about recognition. 
Therefore, once again, we have not escaped the vicious circle: we reach only that 
which we had projected ahead of time, something we are able to re-cognize. Through 
an act of will, no change occurs in me: at the other end of the action, I  ﬁ nd myself 
again. In other words, I have not become other, I am not thinking otherwise. Unlike 
an act of will, what is required is an experience that is  undergone , a  negative experience 
that throws all accepted opinions into question. It is only through such an  involuntary 
epochē that the phenomenological attitude can become, as Husserl wanted, a 
vocation. In this way alone, can it become a complete, personal transformation, like 
a “religious conversion.” 24 It must start from the violence of being struck blind, like 
Paul on the road to Damascus. 25 
 Perhaps, however, we can start from a simpler experience than Paul on the road to 
Damascus. Let us take another clue (our third) from Plato, from Book VII in the 
 Republic (522c–524b). 26  Appearing after the allegory of the cave, there is a well-known 
illustration. The illustration is supposed to answer the question of what sensation would 
motivate one to ascend from the depths of the cave. In other words, Socrates is trying 
to tell Glaucon how certain kinds of sensations provoke “thought” (here again the word 
is “ dianoia ”). The sensation is  not , Socrates stresses, that of things “far away”; the 
sensation is  not “shadow paintings.” It is simply the sensation of Socrates’ hand being 
held up to Glaucon’s vision. In particular, it is Socrates’ hand composed of only three 
 ﬁ ngers, the index, the middle, and the little  ﬁ nger. 
 The question is not whether the  ﬁ ngers held up are  ﬁ ngers; the question is not 
whether Glaucon is able to recognize these  ﬁ ngers as  ﬁ ngers. 27 Instead, the question is 
whether the middle  ﬁ nger is big or small. It seems to be at once both big (in relation 
 24  Husserl.  Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaft , §35;  The Crisis of European Sciences and 
Transcendental , §35. 
 25  See “Acts of the Apostles,” Chapter 9. 
 26  I have used the Shorey English translation and the Bloom English translation of the  Republic . 
Plato, Republic II, trans. Paul Shorey (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987). Plato, 
 The Republic of Plato , trans., Allan Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 1968). 
 27  Deleuze,  Proust et les signes  (Paris: Quadrige Presses Universitaires de France, 1996 [1964]), 
122–23; English translation by Richard Howard as  Proust and Signs. The Complete Text 
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 100–01. 
464
L. Lawlor
to the pinky  ﬁ nger) and small (in relation to the index  ﬁ nger). The sensation of the 
middle  ﬁ nger is a  mixture of big and small. According to Plato (through Socrates’ 
mouth), it is this simultaneously contradictory sensation that provokes thought. 
The type of sensation Plato is pointing toward is the paradox of mixtures. Indeed, 
Socrates choice of the  ﬁ ngers indicates something more than the mixture of big and 
small. It also indicates the mixture of sensing and sensed, since the hand, as 
Merleau-Ponty knew best of all, both touches and can be touched. 28  
 There is a duplicity to the very experience of the hand that makes the sensation of 
touching itself paradoxical. 29 When one clasps two hands together, it is not possible 
to determine whether the hand touching is not also the hand being touched. Which is 
the actor and which is the patient, which is the beginning and which is the end? Such 
paradoxes—like the Sorites paradox of the large and the small, but also the paradox 
of auto-affection with which we started—plunge thought into unlimited becoming. 30 
It is from the depth of these mixtures that thought must emerge. And, just as Plato 
knew, when thought emerges from these mixtures, it no longer possesses its former 
opinions, it no longer possesses the attitudes with which it  ﬁ nds itself naturally. Here 
with these double sensations, we have  para-doxa against the  doxa . 
 This whole experience of the hand, however, even with all of its facets, does not 
bring us to the experience of the event. Socrates holding his hand in front of his 
student Glaucon is too friendly. My clasping your hand in a handshake is not disturbing. 
These experiences have no danger to them. However, we know the dangers involved 
in the experience of alcohol and of hallucinogenic drugs. Indeed, Deleuze (both 
when he writes alone and when he writes with Guattari) has more than suggested that 
these experiences might have a philosophical function. He suggests a philosophical 
function for drunkenness because, for Deleuze, the event is like a plague, a wound, 
or a battle (LS 177/151). In fact, Deleuze says, “the battle is not one example of an 
event among others…, [it is] the [event] in its essence” (LS 122/100). 31 The battle is 
the event in its essence because,  ﬁ rst , it involves mixtures, deep mixtures down in the 
battle ﬁ eld, mixtures in this case of bodies, the soldiers clashing. The mixtures consist 
in accidents and chance encounters. The accidents and chances taken make the battle 
singular, unlike any other battle. Here we have the force of singularization that we 
described earlier. However, a series of chance accidents does not make an event. 
If the event were nothing more than a series of accidents, it would indeed be the 
simple equivalent to drunkenness. 
 There is a  second  reason why the battle is the event in its essence. Due to the 
chance mixtures of bodies on the battle ﬁ eld, a soldier comes to be mortally wounded. 
 28  Maurice Merleau-Ponty,  Le visible et l’invisible (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), chapter 4; English 
translation by Alphonso Lingis as  The Visible and the Invisible (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1968), chapter 4. 
 29  John Sallis,  Being and Logos: The Way of Platonic Dialogue (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities 
Press International, 1986), 430. 
 30  Sorites paradoxes are at the heart of Deleuze’s  Logique du sens . 
 31  Deleuze capitalizes the word “event” in the phrase “Event in its essence.” 
465
27 Gilles Deleuze and Hearing-Oneself-Speak
Being caused by the mixture, the wound is an effect. It is the effect of the soldier 
risking his life in the abyss of the battle; he has risked and lost. Due to the mortal 
wound, the soldier has become aware, painfully aware that he is going to die. The 
awareness, however, releases him from the causes of the battle. His wound blinds 
him to the means and the purposes of the battle. The blindness however releases the 
soldier enough to able to see the battle in its unlimitedness hovering above the 
battle ﬁ eld. What does the soldier see? It is not the vision of his personal death; it is 
the vision of impersonal death. 32 The soldiers, whose names he does not know, they 
never  ﬁ nish up with dying (LS 178/152). It is the vision of incessant dying and 
being lost—and not just incessant dying of soldiers with unknown names, but also 
animals perishing and countrysides and cities being destroyed. It is the vision of life 
in its endless struggle with death. This vision is why the event is horrifying. In this 
intuition, chaos has risen from the depths to the surface. Because the surface that the 
vision sees—like a plane—never comes to an end, the vision itself cannot be 
grasped. It is this vision of death never ceasing, never ending, never accomplishing 
itself, never making itself be over once and for all, this vision cannot be thought. 
The inability to stop the struggle is the impotence of the event. It is, however, a 
powerlessness that clearly includes a kind of power. 
 So far, we have seen that the experience of the event involves two features. On the 
one hand, it involves the depth of mixtures, chance relations of cause and effect, 
accidents, which make the battle unlike any other. This is the force of singularization. 
On the other hand, however, there is the force of universalization. Through the effect 
of being wounded, one is forced to see, intuit, have a vision of the battle; the battle 
rises to the surface and is no longer limited to the accidents. Without end, incessantly 
singularities pass away, as if a plague is taking place. There is, however, a third feature 
of the experience of the event.  It is the most important feature . The mortally wounded 
soldier has no choice in relation to the two forces we have just described. The effect 
of the battle is that he is dying and others are incessantly dying. Although the vision 
of the battle’s incessant deaths cannot be grasped, cannot be thought, the unthinkable 
must be thought, the ingraspable must be grasped. Due to the force of universalization, 
something remains of the singularities as they pass away. 
 In this moment of grace between life and death, the mortally wounded soldier is 
able to effectuate the battle differently,  against the incessant deaths being caused in 
the battle.  Counter to the accidental,  de facto characteristics of the battle, he is able 
to select traits that are ideal and  de jure . In other words, he is able to create an ideal 
sense of the battle. In still other words, he is able to create a philosophical concept 
or an artwork. Responding to the vision, the mortally wounded soldier, through the 
selection of traits, a selection that is like a single act of violence, includes all violence 
and all mortal events in one single event—a book, a speech, a picture, a song, or a 
concept—that denounces and deposes all violence and all death (LS 179/152–153). 
 32  Deleuze cites Maurice Blanchot,  L’Espace littéraire (Paris: Folio Essais Gallimard, 1955), 160; 
English translation by Ann Smock as  The Space of Literature (Lincoln, Neb: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1982), 123. 
466
L. Lawlor
The mortally wounded soldier must write the story of the battle—in order to liberate 
it, as Deleuze says, “always for other times” and “to make us go farther than we 
would have ever believed possible.” 33 
 This third feature of the experience of the event amounts to what Deleuze in  The 
Logic of Sense calls “counter-effectuation.” Effectuation, which is the deep, accidental 
mixture of bodies, takes place in the present. The counter-effectuation in the artwork, 
in a novel, in a concept, makes the battle “eternal.” The counter-effectuation is “eternal” 
not in the sense of an eternal present that never changes or of a circle of time that 
constantly returns to the present. The experience of the event is “eternal” in the sense 
of being non-present, that is, it is the experience of the openness of an unlimited past 
and future (LS 78/61). The experience of the event is no longer simply the present of 
effectuation; instead, the battle is always to come and already passed. That is, as an 
ideal sense, the battle appears to lack an origin; but also, as an ideal sense, it exceeds 
all actual ful ﬁ llments. In this sense, the event has never taken place and never will 
take place. What is the experience of the event? It is the grasping in a work of the 
ungraspable vision of incessant struggle: endless fundamental violence. The terrible 
nature of the event means that we really do not know, in the strong sense, what happened 
and what is going to happen. Although we cannot develop it here, this non-knowledge 
(in the strict sense of non-presence) has profound ethical implications.  
 33  (LS 188/161) I have argued for the importance of writing (either a story or a philosophical concept) 
in Deleuze’s thought, and in particular to his concept of becoming in my “Following the Rats: An 
Essay on the Concept of Becoming-Animal in Deleuze and Guattari,”  Sub-Stance, The Political 
Animal 117/37/3 (2008): 169–187. 
467
L. Embree and T. Nenon (eds.), Husserl’s Ideen, Contributions to Phenomenology 66,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5213-9_28, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 1 
 I was given my  ﬁ rst copy of Husserl’s  Ideen I as a present when I graduated from 
college. It was the  Husserliana edition, edited by Walter Biemel. When reading it 
for the  ﬁ rst time, using the critical appendices, I bracketed out Biemel’s additions of 
Husserl’s comments, and, for all practical purposes, restored the original edition of 
the text. Then, as now, I thought it the best book in philosophy I had read since 
Locke’s  Essay and Hume’s  Treatise . And I read  Ideen I in the same way I read 
Locke and Hume at the time: I wrote out what I thought they were talking about, 
tried to see what they were talking about in ways similar to what they ostensibly 
saw. In the case of Husserl, writing out what I thought he was talking about meant 
translating a good deal of  Ideen into English. 
 After graduating from college I went on to graduate school studying with 
Dorion Cairns, Aron Gurwitsch, and Alfred Schutz among others. That study certainly 
broadened and deepened my understanding of Husserl’s  Ideen I  as well as the 
earlier and later works of Husserl I studied at the time. From the earlier and later 
works, under the guidance of my teachers, I learned to see much more in  Ideen 
I than previously afforded me. So far as possible, I tried to bring  Ideen I up to the 
level of analysis of the later work. 
 Once I had  ﬁ nished my doctorate, and began teaching, my study of  Ideen I had 
reached a point where I thought I could begin a translation into English, at  ﬁ rst and 
chie ﬂ y for my own use in teaching graduate courses, but then for a more general 
academic public. It was the latter project that led me to make the translation now in 
print. As I wrote in my Introduction to the translation, to make the translation accept-
able as a published scholarly work I went to great length to compare my translation, 
 F.  Kersten (*) 
 Department of Philosophy ,  University of Wisconsin–Green Bay ,  Green Bay ,  WI ,  USA 
e-mail:  embree@fau.edu 
 Chapter 28 
 Thoughts on the Translation of Husserl’s 
 Ideen, Erstes Buch 
 Fred  Kersten   
468
F. Kersten
 line by line with fragmentary drafts for a translation made by Dorion Cairns, with the 
existing English translation by Boyce Gibson, the French translation by Paul Ricoeur, 
and the Spanish translation by José Gaos. I also had the bene ﬁ t of the  Guide for 
Translating Husserl  of Dorion Cairns, to which I made many additions, emendations, 
and some corrections. 
 Around this time I was able to acquire a nice  ﬁ rst edition of  Ideen I , and was in 
possession of the marvelous edition for  Husserliana edited by Karl Schuhmann. 
 2 
 By the time I came to offer the translation 1 for publication, on and off, I had spent 
some 20 years with Husserl’s text, and felt ready enough to prepare a clean type-
written version of the translation which I felt was also consistent with Cairns’ English 
translations of  Cartesianische Meditationen  and  Formale und transzendentale Logik . 
The translation is based on the  ﬁ rst edition published in Husserl’s  Jahrbuch . In some 
footnotes, and in several appendices, I also included some of Husserl’s marginal 
notes and supplementary material that was published by Walter Biemel and Karl 
Schuhmann in their editions of  Ideen I  in the  Husserliana  series. The editions, and 
how they are treated in the translation, are fully described in the introduction to the 
translation. 
 Although it would be impossible to emulate Husserl’s style, still I thought that in 
English I could present an accessible and plausible text in a consistently “Husserlian” 
fashion that preserved and remained faithful to Husserl’s distinctions and expressed 
his thought and observations in such a way that they conform to the things themselves 
Husserl sought to describe. In any case, translating the book I tried to keep as close 
to Husserl’s language as possible and above all tried to express what he saw in 
writing the book. 
 Even so I still had my doubts and uncertainties. Until I could resolve them, or at 
least make my peace with them, it seemed a good idea to put the translation on the 
back burner (more accurately, in the bottom left-hand drawer of my desk) and let it 
simmer for a while. There it remained for several years. Unfortunately, around that 
time, there were personal problems that arose as well as problems of promotion. 
In short, I needed to publish something more substantial than peer-reviewed articles. 
The only substantial  ﬁ nished work I had on hand was the translation of  Ideen I . 
So off it went to Martinus Nijhoff, the publisher of Husserl’s writings at the time. 
I was grati ﬁ ed that it was accepted, prepared yet another typescript and sent it on. 
So far so good, although two major dif ﬁ culties lay in the way of publication. 
 The  ﬁ rst dif ﬁ culty was that Boyce Gibson’s translation from 1931 was still under 
copyright. The arrangement was made that I would cede about half of any royalties 
 1  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , Book I, trans. 
Frederick Kersten (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1983). 
469
28 Thoughts on the Translation of Husserl’s  Ideen, Erstes Buch 
I might receive to Boyce Gibson’s estate, and that publication of Boyce Gibson’s 
translation would cease. As far as I can tell, that translation nevertheless is still in 
print. It is, of course, dif ﬁ cult to offer a new translation of a book which already 
exists in a famous translation, long accepted as an accurate expression of Husserl’s 
thought. Thus, we now have two translations into English of Husserl’s book, which, 
it seems to me, is really all to the good: the English reader can choose and compare. 
And if both are insuf ﬁ cient, there is no reason why yet another cannot be published. 
Every generation, after all, needs its own translations. 
 The second dif ﬁ culty was that the translation was the  ﬁ rst book the publisher was to 
prepare for printing using a computer. Unfortunately, the publisher’s transfer of the 
typescript to computer posed a variety of problems. A good part of the problem lay in 
the early software used by the publisher: for instance, a misspelled word on one page 
would reappear in a sentence on another page. Or if a word in a sentence was eliminated 
on one page, the word would be added to a sentence on another page. A garbled sentence 
or paragraph on one page might reappear several pages later. And when I would correct 
the weird transpositions, almost always they would end up somewhere else in the 
text. In addition, there were the inevitable misspellings of words in English which had 
to be corrected. I think I have said enough to furnish the picture. 
 And, of course, the more sets of page proofs, the more errors there were in the 
publisher’s transcribing of the typescript to the computer. Correcting page proofs soon 
became a nightmare! I could never get the computerized text fully corrected, and gave 
up after going through eight sets of page proofs. I tried to get an errata sheet published 
with the book, but was informed by the publisher that the publisher does not make 
errors. Fortunately the publisher agreed eventually to publish a paperback edition of 
the translation in which, by then, the software used accommodated correction of many 
of the errors which were silently corrected.  
 3 
 Despite its imperfect printing, the translation has sold fairly well over the years. 
Its reception, however, went from lukewarm and too literal to outright rejection for 
being nothing more than a dictionary-derived translation. And in one case, in a 
German review, I was accused of single-handedly destroying Western metaphysics 
and of ruining the reception of the great philosopher in the English-speaking world. 
Why a German journal would review an English translation I do not know, nor do 
I know how I accomplished such an incredible feat. I was saddened to think I had 
impaired Husserl’s reputation as a thinker, though heartened to think that Western 
metaphysics  ﬁ nally got the kick in the pants it richly deserved. The academic and 
scholarly world is certainly full of surprises. As I said in the introduction to the 
translation, a translation is only that: a translation. It purports to be nothing more. 
 Even so, reading the translation over so many years later my conscience is clear. 
I still think that it is a good, readable translation that allows the reader ample 
opportunity to see the things Husserl discusses and to con ﬁ rm, or to discon ﬁ rm, 
470
F. Kersten
what he describes within the domain of phenomenology. Too, I have been fortunate 
since its publication that many readers and colleagues have generously furnished 
me with corrections, emendations, and suggested improvements in the translation, 
many of which could be included in a second edition of the translation should the 
present publisher be interested. 
 4 
 What I have been able to learn from the First Book of  Ideen is represented in many 
published writings, but especially my book,  Phenomenology: Theory and Practice 
based on the First Book of  Ideen and its Introduction to the projected three books of 
 Ideen . I have since prepared a second edition of this book under its original title, 
 Space, Time and Other, with corrections, revisions, and additional material. The book 
embodies a reading of the First Book of  Ideen as viewed from the standpoint of 
Husserl’s later works, mainly  Formale und transzendentale Logik and  Cartesianische 
Meditationen . That means that, for the most part, the  Husserlian, rather than 
Husserl’s, phenomenology of concern to me is an eidetic, e.g. pure  phenomenological 
idealism. One of the several main purposes of the book is to show that. Almost from 
the very beginning, Husserl was overtly concerned to develop an eidetic, transcen-
dentally pure phenomenological idealism in his special sense of “idealism” and to 
establish its limits. 
 I should add that eidetic, transcendentally pure phenomenological idealism is the 
main active ingredient, as pharmaceuticals say, in most of my other publications on 
phenomenology and phenomenological philosophy. I mention this because one of the 
points I make in  Phenomenology: Theory and Practice is that, although focusing on 
eidetic, transcendentally pure phenomenological  idealism , nowhere does Husserl 
reject a phenomenological  realism . And perhaps this is the crux of the matter. However, 
following a suggestion of Herbert Spiegelberg, instead of considering the difference 
in terms of “idealism” and “realism” it may be more fruitful to consider the difference 
in terms of “transcendental” and “non-transcendental” phenomenologies. 2  
 There is nothing in the “transcendental phenomenology” that precludes a realism, 
nor is the realism any less or more purely descriptive, eidetic phenomenology. 
Further evidence of this is Husserl’s willingness to include in publication of his 
 Jahrbuch essays that would certainly count as cases of “non-transcendental” 
phenomenological  realism . 3  
 Immediate and obvious examples are Pfänder’s studies of will and striving, of 
“sentiments” (Vols. 1, 3), and logic (Vol. 4); Reinach’s essay on civil law (Vol. I); 
Geiger’s several essays on aesthetic enjoyment and art (Vol. I); Paul Linke’s essay 
 2  See Herbert Spiegelberg, “How Subjective is Phenomenology?”  Essays in Phenomenology , ed., 
Maurice Natanson (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), 138. 
 3  See ibid., pp. 138 f. for the “peculiar phenomenological realism” they develop. 
471
28 Thoughts on the Translation of Husserl’s  Ideen, Erstes Buch 
on the perception of motion (Vol. 2); Hermann Ritzel’s essay on analytic judgments 
(Vol. 3); Conrad-Martius’s several essays on ontology of the external world (Vols. 
3, 6, 10); Dietrich von Hildebrand’s several essays on ethics (Vol. 3, 5); Arnold 
Metzger’s essay on epistemology (Vol. 7); Jean Hering’s essay on essence, essentiality 
and idea (Vol. 4); and Herbert Spiegelberg on the nature and ontology of Idea, on 
law, and ethics (Vol. 11). 4 
 To be sure, there are many separate publications by those authors. Still other 
writers whose work might be classed under the general heading of “non-transcendental” 
phenomenological realism are Wilhelm Schapp 5 on the phenomenology of perception, 
Heinrich Hofmann’s essay on sensations 6 (which gave rise to a long review of 
Husserl’s  Ideen and phenomenology by the Spanish philosopher José Ortega y 
Gasset 7 ), Theodor Conrad’s essay on the eidetic theory of mental life, 8 and one of 
my favorites, Herbert Leyendecker’s wonderful essay on the phenomenology of 
illusion. 9 Of course one can make up one’s own list where, under the in ﬂ uence of the 
First Book of Husserl’s  Ideen , writers laid out a phenomenological realism. And, to 
be sure, the list is equally long of those who set forth a phenomenological idealism. 
Perhaps as well many who did both. 
 Although, as I said, eidetic, transcendentally, or non-transcendentally pure 
phenomenologies may not exclude each other, there remains the question of the 
relationship between them. It does not seem to me to be the case that the one is 
implicitly the other, nor does the one entail in some sense the other. Can the one 
be “translated” into the other? Do they each in their own way disclose different 
phenomenological domains? Do they somehow “overlap”? Or is the one “naïve” 
with respect to the other? 
 How do we proceed to resolve these (and similar) questions? Is it simply a matter 
of comparing pure phenomenological descriptions of the ostensibly “same” state of 
affairs? Even if we are successful in doing that, seeing in what ways the descriptions 
are similar and different, what do we do then? Reconcile or unite them in some 
“meta-phenomenological” account? How do we know we are even talking about the 
“same” thing? After all, for those of a “realist” persuasion in phenomenology 
Husserl’s “idealism” in the First Book of  Ideen smacks of the very metaphysics 
Husserl sought to avoid in the  ﬁ rst place in launching his phenomenology. 10 
 4  A bibliography as well as brief reviews of these  Yearbook essays can be found in Herbert 
Spiegelberg,  The Phenomenological Movement. A Historical Introduction , Third Revised and 
Enlarged Edition, with the Collaboration of Karl Schuhmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1982). 
 5  Wilhelm Schapp,  Beiträge zur Phänomenologie der Wahrnehmung (Göttingen: W. Fr. Kaestner, 
1910). 
 6  Heinrich Hofmann, “Untersuchungen über den Emp ﬁ ndungsbegriff,”  Archiv für die gesamte 
Psychologie XXVI (1913): 1–135. 
 7  José Ortega y Gasset, “Sobre el concpeto de sensación,”  Obras Completas, Vol. 1, (Madrid: 
Reviste de Occidente, 1950), 245–261. This essay was originally published in 1913. 
 8  Theodor Conrad,  Zur Wesenslehre des psychischen Lebens und Erleben (Den Haag: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1968). 
 9  Herbert Leyendecker,  Zur Phänomenologie der Täuschungen (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1913). 
 10  Cf. Herbert Spiegelberg, “How Subjective is Phenomenology?”  loc. cit ., pp. 140 ff. 
472
F. Kersten
 To say the least, Husserl’s phenomenological collaborators and colleagues viewed 
the “idealism” of  Ideen  with considerable suspicion. And from outside the phenome-
nological circle there was critical issue taken with phenomenological idealism. 
For example, Paul Natorp’s sympathetic but critical review of  Ideen , or perhaps also 
the sympathetic but likewise critical account provided by Georg Misch from yet 
another angle, that of the “school” of Dilthey. 11  Too, there is the much less sympathetic 
criticism of the Rickert “school” of Rudolf Zocher and Friedrich Kreis, famously 
reviewed by Eugen Fink. 12 Finally it is worth mentioning the interesting collection of 
readings assembled by Roderick Chisholm under the heading of  Realism and the 
Background of Phenomenology . 13 Here the case for phenomenological “realism” is set 
by Brentano and Meinong, expanded to Husserl’s non-German contemporaries that 
include not only H.A. Prichard, but the American “New Realists,” 14 Samuel Alexander, 
Bertand Russell, Arthur Lovejoy and G.E. Moore. 
 And, in more recent times, Herbert Spiegelberg did not hesitate in remarking that 
 transcendental phenomenology was a dead end from the beginning, rejected as 
much by Husserl’s colleagues and fellow phenomenologists as, early on, by his 
many students. 15 It is, of course, bad enough to be misjudged by one’s peers, but 
even worse to be so judged by one’s students. Transcendental phenomenology, it 
would seem, has never been approved without gross quali ﬁ cation. 
 5 
 For the record, it is worthwhile sketching very brie ﬂ y my own view of the matter. 
In his  Logische Untersuchungen, second edition ,  and in  Ideen , Introduction and 
First Book, Husserl develops the view (1) that there is an  a priori of “Consciousness,” 
as well as of its objects of any sort you please; (2) that therefore a non-formal or 
 11  Paul Natorp, “Husserl’s ‘Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie,’”  Logos VII (1917/18): 224–246; 
Georg Misch,  Lebensphilosophie und Phänomenologie. Eine Auseinandersetzung der Dilthey’schen 
Richtung mit Heidegger und Husserl  (Berlin and Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1931). For a discussion of 
Natorp and Husserl, see Fred Kersten, “The Occasion and Novelty of Husserl’s Phenomenology of 
Essence,”  Essays in Honor of Herbert Spiegelberg , Philip Bossert ed. (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1975), 61–92.  
 12  Eugen Fink, “Die phänomenologische Philosophie Edmund Husserls in der gegenwärtigen 
Kritik,”  Kant-Studien 38 (1933): 319–383. (English translation in  The Phenomenology of Husserl. 
Selected Critical Readings , R.O. Elveton ed. (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1970), 73–145. 
Elveton’s Introduction discusses the various criticisms of Husserl’s “idealism” by Husserl’s con-
temporaries (e.g., Reinach, Conrad-Martius). 
 13  Roderick M. Chisholm,  Realism and the Background of Phenomenology  (Glencoe, Ill: The Free 
Press of Glencoe, Illinois, 1960). 
 14  E.B. Holt. W.T. Marvin, W.P. Montague, R.B. Perry, W.B. Pitkin, E.G. Spaulding. 
 15  See the exchange between Calvin Schrag and Herbert Spiegelberg in  The Journal of the British 
Society for Phenomenology, II., No. 3 (October, 1980): 281 ff.; and Theodor Celms,  Der phänom-
enologische Idealismus Husserls (Riga: Acta Universitatis Latviensis, XIX, 1928), Chapter VI. 
473
28 Thoughts on the Translation of Husserl’s  Ideen, Erstes Buch 
“ material” eidetic science of consciousness itself is possible and can be progressively 
realized; (3) that the de ﬁ nite conditions of the ideal possibility and compossibility 
of the operations of consciousness can be directly seized upon in re ﬂ ection and 
formulated in universally valid and necessary laws; and (4) that the  only assumption 
required to legitimize 1–3 is that one’s own or consciousness is a possible  empirical 
instance or exempli ﬁ cation of the  Eidos , consciousness. By exercising phenomeno-
logical epochē on the assumption, extending the resultant “reductions” or “discrimi-
nations” to the limit, one arrives at a “subject-related” though not a “subject-dependent” 
account of the transcendental constituting of the world. 
 Expressed in formally objective, logical terms, this means that the necessary 
conditions for the ideal possibility and compossibility of speci ﬁ c acts or operations 
of consciousness prove to be necessary conditions for the ideal possibility and 
compossibility of objects experienced and constituted in consciousness of them. 
The eidetic conditions are, therefore, universally valid conditions for the possibility 
and compossibility of constituting any Objects you please, whether they be things 
or Ideas (or “essences,” or “universals”). Moreover, the propositions and judgments 
of and about the constituting of the universe of the ideal possibility and compossi-
bility of any objects you please are independent of any constituting of factual matters. 
The positing of factual matters in no way validates or invalidates propositions and 
judgments of an eidetic science. Eidetic propositions and judgments exclusively 
concern the constituting of ideal possibilities and compossibilities. They do not 
concern the constituting of factual matters  per se . This novel twist in Husserl’s 
thinking is perhaps best expressed in the second edition of  Logische Untersuchungen , 
worked out a year before in the  ﬁ rst book of  Ideen :
  …phenomenology is not descriptive psychology: its peculiar “pure” description, its 
contemplation of pure essences on a basis of exemplary individual intuitions of experience 
(often freely imagined ones), and its descriptive  ﬁ xation of the contemplated essences into 
pure concepts, is no empirical scienti ﬁ c description. It rather excludes the natural performance 
of all empirical (naturalistic) apperceptions and positings. Statements of descriptive 
psychology regarding “perceptions,” “judgments,” “feelings,” “volitions,” etc., use such 
names to refer to the real states of animal organisms in a real natural order, just as descriptive 
statements concerning physical states deal with happenings in a nature not imagined but 
real. All general statements have here a character of empirical generality: they hold for  this 
nature. Phenomenology, however, does not discuss states of animal organisms…but 
perceptions, judgments, feelings  as such , and what pertains to them  a priori with unlimited 
generality, as  pure instances of  pure species, of what may be seen through a purely intuitive 
apprehension of essence, whether generic or speci ﬁ c. 16 
 Here and in the continuation of this passage Husserl develops the view that ideas, 
essences, are seen and apprehended in a manner generically alike but speci ﬁ cally 
different from the way in which real individual things are perceived and apprehended. 
We may expand his view here in terms of  ﬁ ve points:
 16  Edmund Husserl,  Logische Untersuchungen II, 1 (Halle a.d. S: Max Niemeyer, 1928), 17 ff.; 
English translation, Vol. I, trans. J. N. Findlay (New York: The Humanities Press, 1970), 261. 
474
F. Kersten
 First , the seeing of an essence or  Eidos is founded on actual or imagined (feigned) 
perceiving of  individual exempli ﬁ cations . Indeed, the founding stratum can be as 
much an actual as an imagined (feigned) perceiving, as it can be a recollecting of 
a perceiving. This means that I do not have to see any particular colors, for 
instance, to see and seize upon the universal, Color. But I still have to feign the 
perceiving of colors to do so. 
 Second , there is no analogue in perceiving for the structure manifest in the seeing of 
essences or  Eide , hence there is no “ empirical , scienti ﬁ c description” of them.  
 Third , in the case of perception, the perceived is something real, i.e., in space and time. 
In contrast, space and time are utterly unimportant for the seeing of essences. The 
clear recollecting of an essence, for instance, as previously seen, is forthwith a 
clear seeing of that essence with as much originality as before. Thus even though 
we speak of seeing essences, that need not signify that we also speak of an original 
acquisition of essences any more than the generic likeness and speci ﬁ c difference 
of seeing essences and seeing real individual things means that we must also 
therefore speak of an analogy between those two seeings.  
 Fourth , with respect to perception there is a clear-cut distinction between actually 
seeing something, for example, and feigning the seeing of that something. 
Accordingly, I can speak of seeing possible actual and feigned real individuals. 
In contrast, the distinction is unimportant for seeing essences. It makes no difference 
whether I see or feign the seeing of them.  
 Fifth , and  ﬁ nally, in Husserl’s novel sense,  essences have no metaphysical meaning 
whatever because they are de ﬁ ned only over against fact. Rather than opposites, 
fact and essence are correlative concepts .  
 In a word, all of the differences important for perception are not only unimportant 
for, but are also absent in, seeing essences. The only important difference among 
seeings of essences is that which obtains between those having actual and possible 
individual exempli ﬁ cations, and those that do not. But that is only part of the story. 
Phenomenology, after all, de ﬁ nes itself with respect to other theoretical sciences, 
particularly those which proceed in the “natural theoretical attitude.”  The level of 
discourse is scienti ﬁ c rather than pre-scienti ﬁ c. 17  And natural scienti ﬁ c cognition 
begins with experience, and therefore cognition of realities in the usual sense and 
remains within experience in the usual sense of objectively seizing upon conscious-
ness of real things. In other words, it is taken for granted that  natural theoretical 
cognition only engages worldly, i.e., spatiotemporal, things and not “ideal” or 
transcendental things. Thus the  natural  theoretical attitude is contrasted with a 
(“transcendentally pure”)  phenomenological theoretical attitude as well as  with an 
eidetic  theoretical attitude. 
 In other words, there are eidetic sciences of the natural attitude such as geometry, 
formal and logical disciplines.  In contrast , phenomenology develops a (“transcen-
dentally pure”) eidetic science as well. Phenomenological, theoretical eidetic 
sciences, then, are concerned with “universals” (or essences), with ideal possibilities 
 17  Ideen I, §1. 
475
28 Thoughts on the Translation of Husserl’s  Ideen, Erstes Buch 
and compossibilities, the extension of which is not limited to factual matters or 
factual existence. Examples of such eidetic sciences are not only mathematical ones, 
such as geometry, but especially “material” or “non-formal” sciences coordinate 
with the eidetic science of consciousness. Examples are the so-called human sciences, 
which would include the social sciences and political philosophy in the  phenomeno-
logical , not in the natural, theoretical attitude. 18 
 More speci ﬁ cally, eidetic sciences study structures and relations of ideal possibilities 
and compossibilities which are independent of positing factual matters and existence. 
But this independence does not obtain for the factual matters themselves  with respect to 
eidetic affairs. Every factual matter or occurrence is always presented with some content 
or other, with some determinate and further determinable description, with some properties 
and attributes or other—whether a utensil, an artwork, a perceptual or a sensory datum, 
or even social or political actions and relations. Thus every factual matter or occurrence 
in actual experience refers to a certain material or non-formal region which contains it. 
An eidetic science in the phenomenological theoretical attitude, then, has the further task 
of fashioning true propositions stating what is essentially possible, impossible, compossible, 
non-compossible or necessary in a given material region. A phenomenological eidetic 
science is made up of strictly universal propositions, open to no possible exception, and, 
thus, in a strict sense, contains no inductive generalizations or hypotheses.  
 18