INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME VI
The works in this volume present Dilthey’s most deeply held views 
about the nature of philosophy and how it can guide human prac-
tices. They range from an extensive lecture course on ethics, two 
short texts on philosophy in crisis, a long essay on the changing 
nature of philosophy, his best- known essay on world- view types, 
and a final essay on the rootedness of religiosity in lived experience. 
These works are from the last two decades of Dilthey’s life: the lec-
ture course on ethics was given in 1890 and the religion essay was 
written just prior to his death in 1911. In all these writings, Dilthey 
is reflecting on the history of human problems with an eye to the 
future. The emphasis here is less on the theoretical and evaluative 
issues central to the understanding of human life and history that 
pervade most of his writings, and more on the ultimate questions 
that still haunt philosophical and religious thought. Three of these 
works were available in English before, but are out of print and have 
been carefully retranslated for this volume. The other three include a 
text on what philosophy can contribute to present- day culture, the 
already mentioned essay on religion and the lecture course on eth-
ics. The latter work fills an especially important gap in our overall 
comprehension of Dilthey and will be discussed in some detail.
Dilthey started his lectures on ethics, posthumously published 
with the title System of Ethics, by acknowledging that any new phil-
osophical ethics will only be effective if it can guide the life of indi-
viduals by taking their social situation into account. He promises a 
social ethics that will address the changes that have marked modern 
history ever since the French Revolution. He refers to social ques-
tions that were still unresolved, namely, the demands of the working 
classes as formulated in the theories of the socialists. He regards 
socialism as an attempt at “drawing the ultimate consequences of a 
very powerful line of thought in natural science,” and adds that “if 
natural selection, heredity, and the animal nature of man really are 
to be viewed as the sole principles of social change, then the organi-
zation of the forms of life in society can only be grounded on these 
presuppositions”(36). He further notes that Karl Marx saw these 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
2 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
natural forces of human competition as being aggravated by the 
economic power of capital that threatened ever more workers with 
“a minimally bearable level of subsistence,” therefore necessitating 
“an alteration of the existing relationships of property, inheritance, 
marriage, and family” (36). Acknowledging the inadequacy of many 
social institutions, Dilthey nevertheless finds the Marxist solutions 
based on political economy too reductionist. A better solution to 
these problems must be found through a more comprehensive social 
ethics that will be able to put our animal nature in context.
Before working this out, however, Dilthey considers the three 
main ways in which social practices have been evaluated and jus-
tified by philosophers. He begins by saying that social institutions 
can no longer be defended by traditional idealistic principles based 
on theological and metaphysical systems that posit a transcendent 
reality. The modern naturalistic system of morality is an advance in 
attempting to derive its tenets from human nature. Dilthey, how-
ever, regards its focus on the competitive nature of human beings 
and their interest in individual self- preservation as too limiting. He 
also takes note of a third emerging nineteenth- century approach to 
ethics based on the study of group phenomena and socio- historical 
movements. In Germany, this produced a Hegelian type of devel-
opmental theory that subordinates individuals to communal ideals 
that unfold our human destiny. In France and England, it gener-
ated biologically rooted theories of evolution that stress our need 
to adapt to our circumstances. Here again Dilthey finds that no 
satisfactory solution has come about. To resolve the tensions that 
remain in the second and third approaches based on individual ex-
perience and group phenomena respectively, he concludes that a 
“critical consciousness” based on anthropological “self- reflection” 
is necessary. It is this new perspective that is then directed against 
utilitarianism, which is seen as a “compromise” between a reductive 
naturalism and a social ethical approach (see 49).
While approving of John Stuart Mill’s efforts to make naturalis-
tic ethics more socially and historically engaged, he finds his goals 
to be unrealistic. This is because Mill’s utilitarian starting point nar-
rows human beings to sense- based intellects (see 50). The utilitarian 
principle of maximizing happiness reduces ethics to an intellectual 
exercise of calculating pleasures that are at base sensuous. Dilthey 
welcomed Mill’s efforts to introduce qualitative differentiations into 
the feeling of pleasure as an improvement over Jeremy Bentham’s 
quantitative approach, but they still fail to uncover the true motives 
for human action. We do not merely act to quantitatively increase 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
3
or qualitatively enhance our happiness. Neither Bentham nor Mill 
has a real understanding of the ways in which human feelings are 
rooted in human drives and desires. Therefore, they cannot account 
fully for what motivates individual human agents. Ultimately, Dilthey 
dismisses utilitarianism as a social program that placed too much 
emphasis on governmental legislation.
A true ethics must be able to motivate individuals from within 
rather than through legislation from without. To better understand 
human motivation, Mill’s utilitarianism needs a richer sense of hu-
man nature. Dilthey often criticized the associationist psychology 
of the British for not appreciating the true interconnectedness of 
our conscious states, and therefore he proposed a descriptive struc-
tural psychology to underscore that what we perceive, feel, and will 
forms a complex nexus.1 What we perceive is not just sense- based, 
but also affected by how we feel and what we will. The delineation 
of this reciprocal nexus was to provide a contextual understanding 
for subsequent explanations of human behavior. For the sake of 
guiding ethical action, Dilthey also thought it important to look 
deeper for the kind of motivating impulses that can account for 
social cooperation among human beings. Isolating a special psy-
chological feeling such as the sympathy of David Hume and Adam 
Smith is not going to adequately explain altruistic deeds. A more 
encompassing kind of anthropological reflection is needed.
Accordingly, Dilthey defines his task in the lectures on eth-
ics as developing a “psycho- ethical” approach that is rooted in 
 “anthropological- historical analysis” (104). Whereas traditional 
psychology has analyzed feelings mainly as responses to sense im-
pressions that come from without, a psycho- ethical understanding 
of the feelings and incentives that can motivate us to act must be 
rooted in an anthropological analysis of the drives, instincts, and 
desires that impel us from within. Instead of considering human 
beings as primarily adapting to their surroundings by intellectual 
processes and felt responses, Dilthey argues that many of our actions 
are at root instinctive.
Like many modern philosophers, utilitarians have tended to 
construct our mental life starting with sense- impressions as the el-
ementary constituents needed to cognize the world. What is cogni-
tively represented is then assessed by feelings so that finally the will 
can decide how to respond to and act in the world. According to 
1 See Dilthey, Ideas for a Descriptive and Analytical Psychology, in Selected 
Works (hereafter SW), vol. 2 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010).
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
4 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
Dilthey this intellectual reconstruction ignores not only the many 
ways in which our cognitive perceptions, feelings, and desires are 
directly interwoven, but also how they are affected by our instinc-
tive life. The anthropological considerations that Dilthey seeks to 
relate to ethical self- reflection go all the way back to our biological 
makeup. Thus he states that “instinct and feeling . . . cannot be 
separated from each other within the concrete biological sciences” 
(73). Our behavior cannot be separated from the most basic reflex- 
mechanisms of our body, and much of it does not require any input 
from the will. Dilthey’s claim that “the schema of a living being con-
sists of reacting to impressions so as to re- establish equilibrium” 
(70) has led Peter Krausser to characterize Dilthey’s anthropology 
as a cybernetic system. Although Dilthey did not yet possess the ter-
minology of twentieth- century cybernetics to fill out his stimulus- 
response schema with concepts such as “self- regulation” and 
“feedback,” Krausser finds the basic features of self- maintaining 
functional systems in these lectures on ethics.2 While there are as-
pects of this kind of perspective in Dilthey’s biological descriptions, 
it is unlikely that he would have been content to describe a human 
being as simply a causal system that reacts to stimuli from its milieu 
to learn to survive by a process of adaptation.
Throughout his writings, Dilthey makes it very clear that his life- 
philosophy is not to be reduced to a biological theory of organic 
self- preservation and mere self- propagation. Instead, he sees life as 
in essence generative and expansive. It encompasses both natural 
forces and emergent powers. Applying this to social life, Dilthey 
claims that the “psychological core of the original content of virtue” 
lies in “the joyful consciousness of power and the intensification of 
the feeling of life that is connected with it. We find its counterpart 
in a shared joy (Mitfreude) when observing others exert power” 
(83).
We even identify with the exertion of power by others as long 
as it is not directed against us to diminish ours. Dilthey states that 
“just as we see animals living in herds, we humans are instinctively 
governed by a drive for sociability” (126), which he defines as an 
anthropological sense of solidarity. This human solidarity encom-
passes a fellow- feeling (Mitgefühl) or bondedness- with- others that 
goes deeper than the sympathy (Sympathie) of the British mor-
alists. Sympathy is a feeling “transferred from one living being to 
2 See P. Krausser, “Diltheys philosophische Anthropologie,” Journal of the His-
tory of Philosophy 1 (1963): 211– 221.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
5
another” (89). It affects us from the outside and can motivate us 
to act, but is it a reliable source of motivation? Dilthey asks sim-
ilar questions about the “pity” that tragedy is said to arouse and 
the “compassion” for all living beings that Schopenhauer locates at 
the root of morality. Sympathy, pity, and compassion are modes of 
“suffering with (Mitleid)” that Dilthey regards as a mere “conjoint 
movement or being stirred” (Mitbewegung)” (89, 96) from without. 
Kant had criticized sympathy for being too passive and ultimately 
replaced it with an active moral feeling of participation (thätige 
Theilnehmung) in such late writings as The Metaphysics of Morals. 
Dilthey is less critical of sympathy but calls it a superficial psycho-
logical response. Moreover, he points to the limits of Schopenhau-
er’s appeal to compassion by seeing our relations with others as a 
sharing of both suffering and joy. He writes:
Being engaged with and having our feelings stirred by suffering 
or joy outside us is an elementary phenomenon. It is everywhere 
connected with the imaginative re- creation and vicarious un-
derstanding of the inner states of others. But this presupposes 
an already existing consciousness of a bond and commonality, 
and is dependent on them. . . . [O]n the general foundation 
of fellow- feelings that reach back into animal life, we develop 
benevolence and respect for the interests of others (105).
It is by drawing on a dynamic fellow- feeling of solidarity that stems 
from within— the inner sense of belonging to something larger than 
ourselves— that we can gain the basis for fully engaging with others 
through practical understanding. Only then can the sympathetic re-
sponse of feeling stirred by others become a true concern for them 
that will activate us. Similarly, the pity associated with tragedy ever 
since Aristotle is according to Dilthey, “merely the feeling that pre-
cedes the tragic sentiment. The latter is based on engagement, imag-
inative understanding, and re- creation. Consciousness of kinship is 
part of it and indeed elevates it to a higher level. On this, then, is 
grounded a kind of consciousness of the solidarity of human destiny” 
(102). The resulting tragic sentiment is the fellow- feeling of human 
solidarity in which the burdens of life are shared.
Anthropologically, we are naturally engaged with others around 
us, but the strength of this solidarity will vary. The extent to which 
we are motivated by a sense of solidarity is a function of the lo-
cal sphere of commonality of objective spirit that nurtures us from 
birth on. Morally, however, it is our task to cultivate this local sense 
of solidarity into the incentive of benevolence (Wohlwollen), which 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
6 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
is potentially universal. Human beings must actively will the wel-
fare of all others to be ethical. Just as the psychological feelings of 
sympathy and compassion were too ephemeral to move us to act 
with the conviction and consistency that defines ethical behavior, 
so the anthropological sense of solidarity cannot become an ethical 
incentive if it is not transformed into the “willing to do well” (wohl- 
wollen) that characterizes benevolence.
With benevolence we are leaving the level of our instincts and 
drives for the level of explicit willing. It is interesting to note that 
Dilthey distinguishes three philosophical conceptions of the role of 
the will in ethics. The first assigns the will a negative role and ex-
pects us to deny our bodily and animal nature and to rise above it. 
This supra- worldly stance is assigned to Neo- Platonism, Christian-
ity, Buddhism, and Schopenhauer. Because it negates life, this would 
be the least attractive ethical standpoint for Dilthey. Schopenhauer 
draws the ultimate consequence from it by declaring the individual 
self to be unimportant.
The second philosophical approach limits the will from without. 
This restrictive kind of ethics is identified with the Stoics and Kant 
who expect individuals to restrain their selfish inclinations when 
they come into conflict with the demands of practical reason. It is 
the ethical position that brings out what it means to submit to what 
reason prescribes as the right thing to do.
The third ethical approach attempts to limit the will from within. 
It develops a formative conception of the will that seeks to bridge 
the gap between the animalistic aspects of human life and our spiri-
tual potential. Dilthey’s efforts to properly understand the nature of 
human drives can be seen as directed at more fully explicating this 
formative standpoint into an ethics of resolve. It also coheres with 
his aim as a philosopher of life to articulate an ethical system that 
proceeds from the ground up. While accepting life as we inherit it, 
this formative approach to ethics also stresses the need to cultivate 
and shape it. Here Dilthey alludes to the moderating life- style of 
the ancient Greeks where self- control and resolve was essential (see 
82–83).
The human benevolence that Dilthey wants to cultivate as a for-
mative ethical stance is not some divinely inspired ideal, nor is 
it the purely rational sentiment that Kant proposed. Benevolence 
expands the natural bond (Band) that is felt in solidarity into a 
volitional commitment (Bindung) to others. It is at this point that 
Dilthey begins to speak of obligations and duties that bind us mu-
tually. Solidarity and benevolence provide the background for the 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
7
recognition of a reciprocity of obligation. This means that “even 
when the will binds itself, not to another, but to itself— a case to 
which the label of obligation can be applied only by extrapolation— 
the will divides itself, so to speak, into earlier and later acts. We 
are truly obligated, however, only vis- à- vis another to whom we 
are bound because our will concluded an act or entered a rela-
tionship, requiring us to remain the same over time” (106). This 
stabilization of mutual dependence can then be institutionalized 
as a social system of justice. Dilthey writes: “When compulsion 
within an association is added to this relationship and endowed 
with absolute (not merely relative) coercive measures, then a judi-
cial system of law emerges” (107). But what makes this possible is 
the individual will “view[ing] itself as committed to the world of 
values through duty and justice. . . . From a personal standpoint, 
this commitment involves a sense of what is right or just. It comes 
with its own feeling of duty to mutual order and possesses a moral 
value completely independent of any purposes” (107). The expres-
sion, “sense of what is right or just,” attempts to capture what 
Dilthey means by Rechtschaffenheit, which can also be translated 
as “uprightness.” But uprightness has the connotation of a private 
virtue, which loses the social dimension that Dilthey attempts to 
incorporate. This becomes more evident in the next part of the 
System of Ethics, which focuses on social ethics.
In this final part, Dilthey delineates what he considers the three 
main volitional incentives that drive the evolution of ethical life. 
The first incentive of the will is the striving for personal excellence 
along the lines of the formative kind of ethics we saw him espouse. 
The second incentive centers again on benevolence as a social vir-
tue. The third volitional incentive is described as “the consciousness 
of the commitment that inheres in the duty to do what is right” (128). 
At the heart of this sense of commitment is the respect for others 
as ends in themselves. The respect for others that was reflexive or 
implicit in instinctive solidarity and felt in benevolence is now rec-
ognized to be at the core of the reflective commitment to do what is 
right. This socially directed sense of rightness is independent of any 
external enforceability.
In the concluding lecture of section three, Dilthey moves from 
the level of subjective volitional incentives to that of objective ethi-
cal principles. He does so by drawing on an early essay from 1864 
in which he affirmed that moral oughts are unconditional, as Kant 
had claimed, and that accordingly they may be considered as syn-
thetic a priori practical judgments. This may seem strange, not only 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
8 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
because Dilthey expressed his reservations about synthetic a pri-
ori theoretical judgments throughout his life, but also because the 
just discussed incentives of will were rooted in empirical instinctive 
relations such as solidarity. But now Dilthey makes it clear that 
the ethical obligations we adopt as adults have a prescriptive and 
normative quality that is not empirically derivable. The three social 
incentives that we spoke of earlier are now reformulated as syn-
thetic a priori ethical principles and in doing so are given a new 
ranking. Now the commitment to what is right or just is given pri-
ority over the feeling of benevolence because it represents our most 
fundamental obligation. Dilthey refers to character when speaking 
of his commitment to what is right or just, and although he does 
not mention Kant here, it is interesting to note that it was at the 
level of character that Kant had specifically located the virtue of 
uprightness (Rechtschaffenheit) in his lectures on anthropology. By 
contrast, the virtue of beneficence (Wohthätigkeit) that follows up 
on benevolence merely manifests one’s inborn good- heartedness ac-
cording to Kant. The responsibility that comes with the uprightness 
that recognizes what is right is an achievement that presupposes 
active character formation.3 Dilthey affirms that the commitment 
to what is right or just is unconditional, yet it is not abstract like 
Kant’s categorical imperative. The commitment is based on respect 
for other human beings as ends in themselves rather than on Kant’s 
respect for a higher law. Qua moral principle, this commitment to 
justice is called a synthetic principle of unity because it involves the 
obligation to identify with the rights of the other. The second ethical 
principle loosens this being bound by the other into the broader feel-
ing of benevolence. Benevolence “does not place us into that rigid 
chain of mutual obligation through the will’s sense of what is right, 
but rather in a free reciprocal relation of human sentiments that, 
without a feeling of compulsion, pervades the whole moral world” 
(135). The principle of benevolence transforms the respect for the 
rights of others into a caring for their fate.4 It adds a more free and 
open- ended synthetic principle of multiplicity that encompasses 
3 Immanuel Kant, Vorlesungen zur Anthropologie, in Kant’s gesammelte Schriften, 
herausgegeben von der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (AA). 
29 vols. (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1902– 1997). 25: 632.
4 Dilthey considered women to be more attuned to this principle of benevolence 
than men, on the basis of which he made the unfortunate assumption that they are 
not likely to act in accordance with his first more fundamental principle of commit-
ment. This led him to say things about their role in political life that go against his 
generally more liberal views about human social life.
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   8
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
9
both what unites and differentiates human beings. Although benev-
olence was also a Kantian virtue, Dilthey’s affirmation of it seems 
to be more in the spirit of Lessing who encouraged a tolerance of 
difference.
It is not until he formulates his third ethical principle that Dilthey 
invokes universal validity. It moves beyond both the universal com-
mitment of equity and what he calls the “unsurveyable” universality 
of benevolence to project a universal ideal of perfection. But this 
ideal does not provide the law- bound universal validity of a homo-
geneous consensus valid for all time. The attempt to articulate a uni-
versally valid morality will according to Dilthey produce different 
forms over time. He writes:
The urge toward perfection, like benevolence and fidelity to 
mutual justice, involves a creative synthesis of our moral or-
ganization; however, its conception and clarification in con-
sciousness is obtained in combination with the theoretical 
content of the human spirit. Thus, there are as many different 
ways to understand the nature and basis of this urge for per-
fection and value as there are cultural stages (136).
The universal ideal of perfection produces a synthetic plurality of 
articulated cultural systems over time, some of which are religious 
and some secular. Thus the creative nature of morality expresses 
itself in three forms of synthesis: as the unity (Einheit) of commit-
ment to what is right, as an encompassing but undifferentiated mul-
tiplicity (Vielheit) of benevolence, and as a differentiated plurality 
(Mehrheit) of systems that aim to perfect the “striving for inner 
worth” (136).
Whereas traditional ethics located the ideal of inner worth in 
individual character, Dilthey’s social ethics also projects this ideal 
into the historical world of cultural development. Here we find the 
paradox that will define the rest of this volume: The very attempt 
to create a universally valid form of morality produces historically 
distinct ethical systems, each claiming to possess its own inner 
worth. In these lectures, Dilthey suggests that different ethical sys-
tems will have points of intersection that support each other in life, 
and merely clash in theory. But if the attempt to perfect morality 
in universally valid terms requires theoretical input about its so-
cial context that manifests itself in different organizational forms, 
then the clash among ethical systems cannot be waved aside. In the 
final paragraph of the System of Ethics, added by the editor Her-
man Nohl from another text by Dilthey, we see him reject ethical 
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   9
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
10 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
theories that attempt to derive his three ethical principles from one 
overarching principle. We are urged to only accept ethical princi-
ples that are formed from the ground up. But this does not solve 
the problem of adjudicating among the various systems that have 
evolved over time and disagree precisely about which of the dif-
ferent ethical principles should be given priority. This is the kind 
of problem that will haunt Dilthey throughout his late writings. It 
lies in the recognition that the systematic totalizing produced by 
the philosophical striving for universal truth seems to aggravate 
the problem of relativism produced by our ever- widening historical 
understanding.
In the next essay, “Present- Day Culture and Philosophy,” Dilthey 
reflects on the tasks of philosophy as it is about to enter the twen-
tieth century. He bemoans the fact that his own age “is no wiser 
with respect to the great mystery of the origin of things, the value 
of our existence, or the ultimate worth of our activity than were 
the Greeks in the Ionian or Italian colonies or the Arabs during the 
age of Averroes. Indeed, because we find ourselves surrounded by 
such rapid scientific progress, these problems are more perplexing 
today than in any previous age” (146). Both the natural and human 
sciences have become increasingly professionalized and specialized. 
This has given philosophy the task of rethinking their systematic 
interconnection now that metaphysics has been repudiated. One 
consequence of the success of the sciences is the rise of positivism, 
which Dilthey describes as “the philosophy of the natural scien-
tists. . . . They have found in the expansion of knowledge a clearly 
circumscribed purpose for their existence, and so, for them, the 
question of the value and purpose of life is resolved personally. Dis-
passionately and with resignation, they simply accept the inscrutable” 
(149). For Dilthey, philosophical reflection on the larger questions 
about the ultimate worth of our existence requires a broader life- 
philosophy that is not just based on personal considerations as he 
found it in the writings of Nietzsche and other contemporaries. 
Dilthey is especially critical of Nietzsche’s notion that the will to 
power motivates individuals, for it leads their strivings to be “cut 
off from the purposive systems of culture, and thereby emptied of 
content” (155). Nor is Nietzsche’s response to the rich resources of 
history adequate. Dilthey recognizes that the mere accumulation of 
“relative historical facts” can produce skepticism, but he warns that 
“not until we appropriate all forms of human life, from primitive 
cultures up to the present age, can we complete the tasks of seeking 
what is universally valid in the relative, of locating a secure future 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
11
on the basis of the past, and of raising the subject into historical 
consciousness” (159).
The increasingly dominant theme of the rest of this volume is 
that of philosophical systems and world- views. Here Dilthey could 
be said to be doing meta- philosophy. Dilthey’s interest in the classi-
fication of types of philosophical systems coincided with his grow-
ing interest in their relation to the sciences. This may have been 
inspired to some extent by Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, one of 
Dilthey’s main teachers while he studied in Berlin starting in 1854. 
Trendelenburg distinguished between logico- metaphysical systems 
that stress the role of mechanical forces going back to Democritus 
and those that stress the role of rational thought as in Platonism. A 
third alternative is Spinozism, which he regarded as an attempt to find 
the identity of these two approaches: the scientific and speculative.5
But an even earlier 1852 journal entry by the nineteen- year- old 
Dilthey begins with a threefold distinction of life- attitudes that he 
associates with the rise of individualism in the eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries when the times were not yet ready to accom-
modate modern ideals. These attitudes are closer to what he would 
later define as world- views as distinct from philosophical systems. 
A typical German life- attitude was inspired by the adoption of lofty 
Fichtean ethical ideals that is followed by bitter disappointment 
with harsh reality. Here Dilthey refers to Goethe’s Werther and 
Hölderlin’s Hyperion as displaying painful yearning. He found a 
more empirical British counterpart in Lord Byron, who after expe-
riencing disappointments in the life of sensuous pleasure and sexual 
passion seeks to overcome the consequent feeling of emptiness by 
seeking to defy the forces of tyranny and fighting for the liberation 
of Greece. A third response to this divide between reality and hu-
man ideals is found in the mature Goethe, who after having experi-
enced Werther- like despair came to discern in life signs of eventual 
reconciliation. Also noted here is the influence of Spinoza’s panthe-
ism on the late Goethe.
Dilthey’s first extensive delineation of a threefold typology of phil-
osophical systems can be found in his 1898 essay “Die drei Grund-
formen der Systeme in der ersten Hälfte des 19. Jahrhunderts.”6 
5 Fr. A. Trendelenburg, “Über den letzten Unterschied der philosophischen Sys-
teme,” in Historische Beiträge zur Philosophie, vol. II. (Berlin: Verlag von G. Bethge, 
1855), 1– 30.
6 See Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften, (hereafter GS) IV (Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner 
Verlaggesellschaft, Göttingen & Ruprecht, 1959), 528– 554.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
12 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
Further important steps on the way to the later formulations pub-
lished in this volume are the lecture course “System der Philosophie 
in Grundzügen” of 18997 and a 1900 treatise on pantheism, which 
already contain a definitive delineation of three world- view types.8
“The Dream” is a talk that Dilthey gave in 1903 on the occasion 
of his seventieth birthday and offers an informal introduction to his 
three types of world- view. He describes how he became engrossed 
with an engraving of Raphael’s painting The School of Athens while 
overnighting in the castle of Count Yorck von Wartenburg. “Tired 
and sleepy as I was, I lay down and went right to sleep. And imme-
diately Raphael’s picture and the conversations we had had were 
swallowed up in a busy dreamlife” (165). Dilthey began to imagine 
movement among these figures as later philosophers entered and 
intermingled with them. Gradually the three groups in the painting 
moved further apart. The three increasingly distant groups defined 
themselves in terms of differing world- views. The first group con-
sisted of materialists leading up the positivism of August Comte; 
then he identifies proponents of an idealism of freedom, ranging 
from Plato to Kant; and finally, a group that hovered around Py-
thagoras and Heraclitus. The latter group, which also came to in-
clude Bruno, Leibniz, and Goethe, seemed the most encompassing 
in espousing “a ubiquitous, spiritual, divine force in the universe, a 
force that inhabits everything and every person, and which functions 
throughout according to natural laws, so that, apart from it, there is 
no transcendent order and no sphere of free choice” (167). But even 
this group could not satisfy the other thinkers and all attempts to 
mediate among the groups failed. When he awakens disappointed, 
Dilthey recognizes more than ever the conditioned and limited na-
ture of every world- view, but also that historical consciousness al-
lows us to understand why that must be. We can be consoled by 
the realization that each world- view “expresses, within the bounds 
of our thought, one side of the universe. Each world- view is to that 
extent true; but each is one- sided. It is impossible for us to see these 
sides simultaneously. We have access to the pure light of truth only 
in variously refracted rays” (168). The talk ends up with a kind of 
guarded optimism, encouraging us to “strive towards the light, to-
ward the freedom and the beauty of existence. But not by means of a 
7 See Dilthey, GS XX, 237– 252.
8 Dilthey, “Der Entwicklungsgeschichtliche Pantheismus nach seinem geschicht-
lichen Zusammenhang mit den älteren pantheistischen Systemen,“ GS II, 1957, 
312– 390.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
13
new beginning that shakes off the past. We must take the old gods 
with us into every new homeland” (169). Again this is followed by 
a warning directed against Nietzsche’s ahistorical image of human 
beings, for as Dilthey says often: “What man is, only his history 
can tell him” (170). Why Dilthey thinks that old gods should not 
be preemptively dismissed will become more evident in the last es-
say where the function of religiosity is reexplored. Philosophy will 
never totally replace religion, as we are again forced to recognize 
in the twenty- first century.
As in “The Dream,” the 1907 essay “The Essence of Philosophy” 
does not yet offer a full presentation of Dilthey’s typology of world- 
views. This is because it was expected to define philosophy more 
generally. It was written for a volume on Systematic Philosophy in 
a series entitled The Culture of the Present edited by P. Hinneberg. 
Together with some of the best- known German philosophers of the 
age, such as Rudolf Eucken, Theodore Lipps, and Wilhelm Wundt, 
Dilthey was asked to consider philosophy for its potential contribu-
tion to European culture at the beginning of the twentieth century. 
He explores the nature of philosophy in two stages, proceeding 
both historically and systematically. Central to the historical part 
is an attempt to derive the essential features of philosophy from a 
survey of its main formulations. Central to the systematic part is a 
theory of world- views, which on the one hand, considers the rela-
tion of philosophy to religion and poetry, and on the other hand, 
examines the formative law that guides the function of world- views 
and their typology.
The historical part of “The Essence of Philosophy” can be con-
sidered as one of the most concentrated Diltheyan texts that sums 
up the main ideas of his earlier works going back to The Introduc-
tion to the Human Sciences.9 He is especially concerned to show 
why all systematic metaphysics must fail even while philosophy al-
ways manifests “the same tendency towards universality, towards 
grounding, the same direction of mind towards the whole of the 
given world” (198). Dilthey surveys European philosophy starting 
with the Greeks with the aim of gaining a first estimation of the 
essence of philosophy. The path begins with the Socratic love of 
wisdom and the Platonic conception of knowledge as science. This 
then leads to the Aristotelian conception of philosophy as an overall 
science, which in turn generates a process of internal differentiation 
into special sciences— a process that is still going on. A constant 
9 See Dilthey, SW 1.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
14 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
theme of this historical survey is that metaphysics is never able to 
live up to what is expected of it, which then leads to ever new com-
pensatory modes of philosophy such as Stoicism and the late Ro-
man philosophies of life. Dilthey sees similar developments within 
the history of philosophy starting with the seventeenth century in 
which “the courage to strive for strict, universally valid knowledge 
and the transfiguration of the world by means of this knowledge” 
(186) leads to a new concept of metaphysics. Now philosophy 
seeks rigor through allying itself with the mathematical natural 
sciences while differentiating itself by methodological reflection 
aimed at universality and unconditional grounding. Although this 
constructive method of Descartes and Spinoza is undermined by 
the epistemological approach of Locke, Hume, and Kant, the tran-
scendental critique of the latter led to a new German metaphysics 
ranging from Schelling to Schopenhauer (see 186–89). Assessing 
these formulations as well as subsequent attempts at metaphysical 
world interpretation by Johann Friedrich Herbart, Hermann Lotze, 
and Gustav Fechner, Dilthey concludes that “it is not possible to 
take the understanding of the world as it is given in experience and 
as it is cognized by means of the particular sciences and deepen it 
by using a metaphysical method that differs from their way of pro-
ceeding” (189–90).
Dilthey therefore turns to the possibilities of a non- metaphysical 
definition of the essence of philosophy and in doing so distinguishes 
three forms of it in his own time. These are 1) an epistemological 
approach that is primarily concerned with grounding the universal 
validity of the natural sciences, 2) an encyclopedia of the sciences as 
a comprehensive system, and 3) philosophy as the science of inner 
experience, that is, philosophy as a human science. Dilthey looks to 
Kant and Hermann von Helmholtz as representative of epistemo-
logical efforts to legitimate the empirical sciences. The encyclopedic 
approach includes Comte who is credited for “purifying the sci-
ences from every indemonstrable excess resulting from metaphys-
ical conceptions” (193). Hume is considered as one of the fathers 
of the third form of post- metaphysical philosophy in that he de-
voted himself to the “scientific cognizance of man as an intellectual, 
moral, and social creature” (195). Hume’s conception of the moral 
sciences eventually generated a more general theory of the human 
sciences that would also broaden our understanding of philosophy 
itself.
The first epistemological way of approaching philosophy pro-
vides discursive cognition (Erkenntnis) that is purely conceptual and 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
15
intellectual. Since Kant expected philosophy to also provide the cer-
tainty (Gewissheit) of a more comprehensive knowledge (Wissen),10 
he felt the need to relate “all cognition to the essential ends of hu-
man reason” (192) by replacing the traditional academic conception 
of philosophy with a world- oriented philosophy. But to the extent 
that the epistemological approach was primarily focused on our 
access to the world through outer experience, this goal of a more 
comprehensive knowledge remains an unfulfilled ideal according 
to Dilthey. The third or human- science approach that Dilthey pur-
sued claims to have a more direct access to philosophical knowl-
edge by relating outer experience to our inner experience. It aims 
to supplement our phenomenal cognition (Erkenntnis) of nature 
with concrete knowledge (Wissen) of the inner reality of human 
life.11 Positivists like Comte who espouse the encyclopedic view of 
philosophy deny the reality of inner experience, but aim to overcome 
the discursive or piecemeal nature of cognition by constructing a 
comprehensive developmental account of all the sciences. Whether 
their efforts to establish the systematic relations among all the sci-
ences adds up to philosophical knowledge is left undecided. But they 
certainly do not address the riddles of life that are rooted in our inner 
experience.
Beyond these three partial answers to the question about the 
essence of philosophy, there is according to Dilthey a need for a 
“standpoint above the parties” (197), namely, that of historical 
consciousness according to which each of the approaches actual-
izes one possibility of philosophizing. “Each brought to expression 
an essential feature of philosophy and at the same time its limita-
tions pointed to the teleological nexus that conditions it as a part 
of a whole in which alone the complete truth is found” (199). Thus 
there is a historical nexus that leads from the meta physical thought 
of the Greeks, who confronted “the riddle of the world and life in 
a way that was universally valid,” to the post- metaphysical ap-
proaches of modernity: “everything that takes place in philosophy 
10 Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft, B850.
11 All sciences, including the human sciences, are conceptually mediated and 
thus cognitive according to Dilthey. But to the extent that the human sciences reflec-
tively assess inner experience for its reliability (Sicherheit), they can also contribute 
to philosophical knowledge. The traditional rational demand for certainty (Gewiss-
heit) that Kant still upheld is not humanly attainable according to Dilthey. For more 
on his views about the relation between cognition and knowledge, see The Forma-
tion of the Historical World in the Human Sciences, SW 3, 1– 4, 24– 33.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
16 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
is determined in some way by this starting point and its basic 
problem” (198).
As Dilthey winds up the historical part of his search for the es-
sence of philosophy, he makes it clear that it need not be restricted 
to the systems of professional or academic thinkers. He traces “the 
connecting links between philosophy, religiosity, literature, and 
poetry” (200) from Gnosticism and Neo- Platonism to Montaigne, 
Lessing , Nietzsche, and the life- philosophy of the late nineteenth 
century. This section of Dilthey’s text forms a kind of transition to 
the second main part in which he focuses on the life- nexus that 
encompasses the individual and society to find philosophy’s proper 
place there.
This new way of contextualizing philosophy allows us to rec-
ognize its more general function of expressing world- views. In 
defining the significance of world- views, Dilthey relies on the de-
scriptive psychology that he began to develop in the late 1880s. Its 
central role was to articulate a psychic structure in which cognitive, 
emotive, and volitional functions cooperate in apprehending and 
evaluating what is actual and in determining our norms and the 
goals of our actions. This conception as refined in the “Ideas for a 
Descriptive and Analytic Psychology”12 (1894) distinguishes three 
functions within this structural nexus, namely, world- cognition, life- 
experience, and principles of action. The central link in this structural 
coherence is life- experience. It goes beyond what world cognition 
has taught us by reflecting on what we value in life. It prepares us, 
not only for what kind of goals we set, but also for philosophical 
reflection more generally.
In addition to this way of relating philosophy to the structural 
nexus of individual human beings, Dilthey establishes a correspond-
ing linkage of philosophy, religion, and poetry with the structure 
of society. What distinguishes these endeavors from other social 
systems is that they are removed from the practical concerns of 
everyday life. “The commonalities that bind religion, poetry, and 
philosophy, and which separate them from other spheres of life are 
based, finally, on the fact that the application of the will to achieve 
limited ends has been eliminated. Here human beings are emanci-
pated from the attachment to specific givens in that they reflect on 
themselves and the overall relatedness of things” (210).
12 See Dilthey, “Ideas for a Descriptive and Analytic Psychology,” in SW, 2, 
115– 210.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
17
It is at this point that Dilthey begins to analyze the concept of 
world- view itself. We have already seen that experience can lead us 
to reflect on life, and this can happen to those who are religiously or 
poetically inclined as well as to those who are more intellectually in-
clined. All world- views use the reflection inspired by life- experience 
to find an answer to the great riddles of life. What distinguishes reli-
gious world- views is that they evaluate our life- experience through 
communion with the invisible horizon of life. Dilthey points out 
that the “language in which religious communication about the divine 
is manifested must always be simultaneously sensory and spiritual” 
(219).13 This imaginative fusion of the visible and invisible differen-
tiates the religious world- view from both its subsequent poetic and 
philosophical counterparts. Poetic world- views gear the imagina-
tion to what is concretely visible in this world and attempt to give 
it a symbolic significance for life in general, and what distinguishes 
philosophical formulations of world- views is their attempt to surpass 
the imagination and conceptually define them in a universally valid 
manner.
The contextual reference to religion and poetry in the attempt 
to define the role of world- views in philosophy is a distinctive fea-
ture that characterizes not only this essay, but Dilthey’s philosophy 
in general. It distinguishes him, as someone coming to philosophy 
from theology, from Edmund Husserl, who came from mathematics 
and wanted philosophy to be recognized as a rigorous science that 
rises above reflection about world- views. It is thus worth noting 
that in the two years preceding the publication of “The Essence 
of Philosophy,” two important works by Dilthey about the affinity 
of philosophical, theological, and poetic questions appeared. One 
was Die Jugendgeschichte Hegels of 1905, which includes a lengthy 
chapter on the development of Hegel’s world- view in relation to his 
theological studies.14 The other was Das Erlebnis und die Dichtung 
of 1906 with essays on Lessing, Goethe, Novalis, and Hölderlin.15 
The sections on the world- view of Lessing and the development of 
13 This anticipates how Ernst Cassirer subsequently characterizes the mythical 
world: “In it . . . things and signification are undifferentiated, because they merge, 
grow together, concresce in an immediate unity.” The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, 
vol. 2 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1955), 24.
14 See Dilthey, Die Jugendgeschichte Hegels, Gesammelte Schriften, IV, 40– 191.
15 The essays on Goethe and Hölderlin are translated in Dilthey, Poetry and 
Experience, SW 5.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
18 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
Novalis’s world- view16 count among Dilthey’s important ground-
ing documents for the so- called geistesgeschichtliche turn in literary 
and cultural studies. These works were more effective as a counter-
force to positivistic tendencies in the human sciences than Dilthey’s 
more extensive Introduction to the Human Sciences.
An impressive instance of this geistesgeschichtliche method in 
“The Essence of Philosophy” is the section entitled “Religion and 
Poetry in Relation to Philosophy.” One might suspect that Dilthey 
would want to develop a hierarchical schema like Comte’s law of 
three stages, but this is not the case. Dilthey is much more inter-
ested in showing that the “basic differences between the philosoph-
ical, religious, and poetic world- views produce the possibility that 
a transition of a world- view from the religious or artistic form into 
the philosophical form will occur and vice versa” (213–14). His the-
ory of world- views does not construct a law of unilinear develop-
ment but traces a more complex development in which there can 
be cross- fertilization. Thus he shows specific stages and forms in 
the development of the religious world- view from primitive magical 
actions and techniques to “a freer, esoteric relation between the soul 
and the divine” (217). The basic types of religious world- views can 
in many cases be regarded as preliminary stages of philosophical 
world- views. Poetic world- views are different in that the signifi-
cance of experienced reality is not immediately expressible in the 
conceptual language of philosophy. This is because “a poetic world- 
view asserts itself most effectively, not in direct assertions, which are 
never exhaustive, but through the energy with which a manifold 
content is united and its parts are articulated to form a whole” 
(228–29).
The few pages about the structure and types of philosophical 
world- view anticipate what Dilthey will develop in more detail a 
few years later in the “Types of World- View,” and will therefore be 
discussed later. But “The Essence of Philosophy” already develops 
the main argument for the impossibility of metaphysics. This is be-
cause the basic categories such as being, cause, value, and purpose 
are rooted in different attitudes adopted by individuals toward the 
world. These categories can neither be derived from each other nor 
from some higher principle. “It is, so to speak, only possible to per-
ceive the world through one aspect of our relation to it— never the 
overall relation as it would be determined by the systematic unity 
of these categories” (236). Therefore, Dilthey recurs to his central 
16 See Dilthey, GS, XXVI, 78– 112 and 194– 204.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
19
thought about overcoming relativism through historical conscious-
ness. “What can be distilled from the enormous work expended by 
metaphysicians is the historical consciousness that they have repeat-
edly experienced the unfathomable profundity of the world. The last 
word of the spirit that permeates all these metaphysical efforts is not 
the relativity of each world- view, but the sovereignty of the human 
spirit over against each single one of them and at the same time the 
positive consciousness that in the various spiritual attitudes one and 
the same reality of the world is there for us” (237).
The disproportionately short parts 4 and 5 of “The Essence” 
warrant two comments. Their brevity points to the limited space 
allotted to each work in the volume on Systematic Philosophy. Thus 
Dilthey gives only a short summary of some of the functions of phi-
losophy: philosophy as a theory of knowing, as a theory of theories, 
and as an inquiry into how life- experience nurtures the formation 
of a world- view as a mode of reflecting on life. The true essence of 
philosophy derives from the fundamental function of human self- 
reflection. It is this that leads philosophers to both turn inward 
and examine their place in society. Beyond that Dilthey discusses 
the relation of philosophy to the moral world by giving it firm stan-
dards, and finally he claims that one of its most important functions 
is to examine the inner relations among the sciences. In the section 
on “Extending the Spirit of Philosophy to the Sciences and Liter-
ature,” Dilthey offers insight into how philosophical critique can 
be applied to culture. Accordingly, “the spirit of philosophy can be 
found wherever a thinker has moved beyond the systematic form 
of philosophy to examine what is peculiar or obscure in human life 
such as instinct, authority, or faith” (244). Philosophy can be made 
effective outside its own traditional domain.
In the concluding sentence of “The Essence of Philosophy,” 
Dilthey returns once more to the need to coordinate historical and 
systematic considerations in making sense of the functions of philos-
ophy. This was the leading theme of his Introduction to the Human 
Sciences, whose preface promised to “combine a historical approach 
with a systematic one in order to attain as much certainty as possible 
about the philosophical foundations of the human sciences.”17 Just 
as there the historical development of the human sciences was used 
to examine their foundations, legitimacy, and interrelations, so here 
Dilthey speaks of the “three problems of grounding, justifying, and 
interconnecting the particular sciences” that must be related to “the 
17 Dilthey, SW 1: 47.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
20 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
need for ultimate reflection about being, ground, value, purpose and 
how they are linked in a world- view” (247).
The essay entitled “The Types of World- View and Their Devel-
opment in Metaphysical Systems” appeared in the influential vol-
ume Weltanschauung, Philosophie und Religion,18 in which Dilthey 
together with four of his closest followers (Bernhard Groethuysen, 
Max Frischeisen- Köhler, Georg Misch, and Eduard Spranger) first 
presented themselves as a so- called school. Dilthey’s essay does 
not reiterate the hope expressed in his talk “The Dream” nor the 
faith in historical consciousness of “The Essence of Philosophy.” 
Whereas the talk of 1903 was imbued with the eclectic spirit of 
allowing differing schools of thought to coexist, now he writes that 
“the archives of history do not confirm the peaceful conversations 
depicted in Raphael’s ‘School of Athens’ . . . . The contradiction be-
tween increasing historical awareness and the claim of the various 
philosophies to universal validity has become more and more se-
vere” (252). No effective way has been found to express and articu-
late the overall connectedness of things in the universally valid way 
that the separate sciences have achieved. Philosophical systems have 
failed in their attempts to conceptually define the world in its totality, 
but perhaps there is another way to fathom what is ultimately real, 
namely, through world- views.
In “The Essence of Philosophy,” Dilthey tried to open up philos-
ophy and give it new cultural functions, including that of forming 
world- views, but in “The Types of World- View,” he adopts a more 
existential tone to account for their formation. He laments that the 
growth in historical awareness has generally produced a sense of 
anarchy. Only later does he make it clear that a reflective concep-
tion of historical consciousness can overcome the destructive effects 
that mere increased historical awareness has had. True historical 
consciousness must be more than the collection of disparate data; it 
must place “the actually- existing conflict of the systems in their over-
all context” (272). What this means is that historical consciousness 
has to be understood in light of the third kind of post- metaphysical 
kind of philosophy discussed in “The Essence of Philosophy” that 
led to the emergence of the human sciences from the Humean moral 
sciences. Dilthey ends his introduction to “The Types of World- View” 
by claiming that “philosophy must seek the inner coherence of what 
is cognizable, not in the world, but in human beings. To understand 
18 Max Frischeisen- Köhler, ed., Weltanschauung, Philosophie und Religion 
(Berlin: Verlag Reichl, 1911).
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
21
life as lived by human beings is our aspiration today” (254). From 
the perspective of life, the real reason why philosophers have created 
their overarching systems is the human need to be guided by a world- 
view as they confront the future.
World- views are formed in response to the existential needs of life 
itself. Normally, our thoughts and actions are directed at the onward- 
moving chain of events that we are caught up in. But we can suspend 
this forward movement and shift to “a state of repose directed at the 
baseline of life,” in which we also focus on what is felt. In this lived 
experience or existential state, “I respond to people and things, I take 
positions with respect to them, I fulfill their expectations of me and 
I expect something from them. Some make me happy, expand my 
existence and increase my strength, while others exert pressure on 
me and limit me” (254–55). I am not merely observing the world and 
acting on it, but orienting myself in it and judging it in light of my 
basic life- concerns (Lebensbezüge). To be sure, this momentary lived 
experience only gives me insight into my own world.
The second phase in the formation of a world- view involves a 
shift from the reflexivity (Innewerden) of lived experience (Erlebnis) 
to the reflection (Besinnung) of life- experience (Lebenserfahrung), 
which stores and compares these kinds of responses to our situation 
with those of others. Although each of us gathers a different fund 
of life- experience, “its common substratum is formed by insights 
into the power of chance, of the corruptibility of everything that we 
possess or love, hate or fear, and of the constant presence of death, 
which is all- powerful in determining for each of us the meaning and 
sense of life” (255). But attempts to find an overall sense of order 
from our life- concerns and the experiences based on them prove to 
be frustrating. Life shows ever new aspects that render it enigmatic 
as a whole. We cope with this by means of certain life- moods that 
are formed on the basis of certain recurring life- experiences. These 
life- moods (Lebensstimmungen) are attitudes that attune (stimmen) 
us to the world and can initiate the formation of a world- view that 
seeks to solve the riddle of life. There are, according to Dilthey, cer-
tain higher forms of life- mood that are especially suggestive for our 
attempts to understand the incomprehensible overall givenness of 
life. They evoke aspects of reality that speak to our life- concerns. At 
this initial level of their formation, world- views are metaphorical, 
and to that extent philosophical world- views overlap with poetic 
and religious world- views.
Fully developed philosophical world- views have a recurrent 
and more developed structure whereby a cognitive sense of what the 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
22 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
world is like leads to an evaluation of it, which in turn produces 
ideal goals that can serve to guide our life. To this extent world- views 
reflect our overall psychic life, which is not only intellectual, but also 
affective, and volitional. Even philosophical world- views “do not 
arise from the mere will to cognize. Conceiving what is actual is 
an important moment in their formation, but it is only one mo-
ment. World- views are rooted in life- conduct, life- experience, and 
the overall structure of our psychic life” (262). This more layered 
development is common to all world- views, even though they vary 
in accordance with the conditions that influence our lives. These 
further conditions include climate, ethnicity, political and national 
differences, as well as other cultural and historical changes. As 
varied as world- views may end up being, they are not random ag-
gregates of beliefs, but integral configurations that disclose typical 
patterns that recur and strive for dominance. History discards many 
world- views, but because they are projective and speculative, they 
cannot be fully refuted. They are deeply rooted in human life and 
produce ever new constellations.
Before Dilthey analyzes the recurring types of world- view, he 
considers the spheres in which they are formed: namely, philosophy, 
religion, and literature or poetry. Many of the academic functions 
of philosophy, such as epistemology, are allied with the sciences, 
and because of their close ties with praxis, they are constrained by 
external organizations of society. What sets world- view formation 
apart is the release from these external pressures. Thus Dilthey fo-
cuses his analysis on those philosophers who possess what he calls 
“metaphysical genius” (263) as well as on religious thinkers and 
poets. From early on Dilthey was suspicious of metaphysical sys-
tem building, especially as it was perfected by Hegel. In Book 2 
of the Introduction of the Human Sciences, Dilthey allowed for 
metaphysical reflection as long as it does not become doctrinal or 
dogmatic. This suggests that what we should mainly expect from a 
metaphysical genius is a world- view that speaks to our more gen-
eral life- concerns and promotes practical wisdom.
Dilthey begins his analysis of world- view types with religion. 
Because primitive peoples were limited in their ability to compre-
hend and control their circumstances, they turned to individuals who 
claimed to possess techniques of appealing to inscrutable higher 
forces. This made sorcerers, traditional healers, and priests into 
early intermediaries to the supernatural. Consequently, the mean-
ing of what is actual, the worth of this life, and our practical ideals 
were derived from our relation to what is invisible. Dilthey writes 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
23
that “the efficacy of the invisible is the fundamental category of ele-
mentary religious life. Analogical thinking combines religious ideas 
with teachings about the origin of the world and human life, and 
about the origin of the human soul” (264). He distinguishes three 
main types of religious world- view. The first posits “an immanence 
of world- reason in the order of life and the course of nature” (265) 
and is often called pantheism. The second type points to “a spiritual 
All- One that provides the connectedness, truth, and value of all that 
has been dispersed into particular existing beings and to which they 
must return” (265). Dilthey sees this exemplified in Chinese and 
Indian panentheism. The third religious world- view type is modeled 
on “a creative divine will that brings forth the world and creates 
man in its own image or stands in opposition to a realm of evil and 
enlists the pious into its service for this struggle” (265). This religious 
world- view type corresponds to Judaic- Christian theism and would 
seem to produce dualisms.
The arts in general do not set out to create a world- view. Their 
main function is to represent singular events and scenes and to then 
develop them in ways that enhance their human significance with-
out explicitly guiding us how to live our lives. However, for much 
of the past, artists were commissioned by religious institutions and 
expected to illustrate things relevant to religious world- views. Dil-
they points out that there is much sublime art that was inspired by 
religious content, “as is shown by Giotto’s religious epic paintings, 
by great church architecture, and by the music of Bach and Handel” 
(267).
Poetry, however, has an inherent relation to world- view forma-
tion because its medium of language can call up much more of our 
life- experience than the visual and musical arts. By imaginatively ex-
ploring life- possibilities that human beings cannot otherwise realize,
poetry expands their selves and the horizon of their lived ex-
periences. . . . Life is its point of departure and life- concerns 
about people, things and nature are made central. Thus univer-
sal life- moods come into being from the need to bring together 
the experiences that derive from life- concerns, and the overall 
essence of what is experienced in individual life- concerns is the 
poetic consciousness of the meaning of life (267–68).
Poetry transforms events into symbols of what characterizes life 
in general. Dilthey points to the novels of Stendhal and Balzac as 
portraying life as governed “by dark impulses rooted in a nature 
without purpose” (268). Goethe’s world- picture by contrast finds 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
24 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
“in life a creative force that unites organic formations, human de-
velopment, and the orders of society into one worthwhile coherent 
whole” (268). Whereas Goethe regards nature as inherently pur-
posive, Schiller derives purposes from the human will. His dramas 
show life as the stage for heroic deeds and thus prepare the way for 
a world- view that stresses the freedom of humans to assert them-
selves over against a deterministic nature and institutional forces.
Philosophers with a metaphysical bent have attempted to add 
logical and epistemic rigor in formulating world- views that are sci-
entifically grounded. They replace the symbolic coherence of po-
etic world- views with conceptually articulated and systematically 
organized world- views. Whereas writers like Goethe and Balzac 
offered visions of the natural world into which human passions 
and feelings are interwoven, metaphysicians bring out the structural 
layering of fully developed world- views where the comprehension 
of what is actual provides the basis for an assessment of life that 
in turn sets the stage for the setting of purposes. Comprehension of 
what is actual forms a world- picture that sums up our cognition 
of reality. The assessment of life then expresses how we feel about 
the ways of the world and serves to clarify our values. Based on 
this kind of reflective evaluation it becomes possible to define the 
purposes, rules, and ideals that should guide our will. The challenge 
here is how to achieve these many tasks in a coherent and convinc-
ing manner. Since the scientific task of establishing universally valid 
assertions is premised on examining distinct spheres of reality sep-
arately, Dilthey doubts that any metaphysical effort to construct a 
total system can be universally valid. Each attempt will break down 
at some point and lead to alternative solutions.
Metaphysical systems have been classified in terms of empiricism 
and rationalism, realism and idealism. But in order to assess these 
systems for the world- views expressed in them, Dilthey’s prepares 
us for his typology by distinguishing among “life- attitudes” that are 
defined by “relations of dependence, affinity, reciprocal attraction 
or repulsion” (274). Metaphysicians who resemble Balzac in seeing 
human consciousness and spirit as ultimately dependent on nature 
and as subordinate to its deterministic laws exemplify the world- 
view type of naturalism. Those metaphysicians who feel an affinity 
between nature and the human spirit and allow for a Goethean 
continuum of life, represent what Dilthey calls “objective idealism.” 
Finally, those who think in the more dramatic terms of attraction 
and repulsion tend toward an idealism of freedom that posits the 
moral independence of individuals.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
25
The metaphysical world- view of naturalism goes back to the pre- 
Socratic philosopher Democritus and was further developed by Ep-
icurus and Lucretius. In modern times, naturalism was refined by 
British empiricists like Hobbes and Hume, French philosophers such 
as d’Alembert and Comte, and German thinkers such as Ludwig 
Feuerbach and Ludwig Büchner. What unites these manifestations 
of this world- view type is the claim that natural processes exhaust 
what is actual. Spiritual life is merely formally distinct from what is 
physical and functions solely according to natural causality. Natu-
ralism is pluralistic: “its epistemology is sensualism, its metaphysics 
is materialism, and its practical attitude is two- fold— a will for plea-
sure and a reconciliation with the overwhelming and alien course of 
the world by submitting to it in one’s way of thinking” (276). More 
developed forms of naturalism such as that of Lucretius saw the 
limits of a life in pursuit of sensuous pleasures that are inherently 
ephemeral and came to find solace in contemplating the intellectual 
world order. We can conclude that naturalism gives priority to the 
cognitive aspects of human life over the affective and volitional.
By contrast, the idealism of freedom gives priority the volitional 
dimension of human life. Dilthey introduces it as “the creation of 
the Athenian spirit. In Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, 
the sovereign, formative, and shaping energy of this idealism be-
comes the principle by which the world is understood” (282). And 
of course, it found its supreme flowering in Kant and Fichte. Dilthey 
also adds Maine de Biran, Bergson, and William James to his list. 
Opposition to naturalism is its defining principle: Our bodies may 
be physically conditioned, but our spirit is free. The sovereignty of 
the individual person at the same time creates an inner bond with 
other persons that is normative. The epistemology of the idealism 
of freedom transposes empirical facts into what Dilthey calls “facts 
of consciousness” (285) and may even go so far as to claim, as Kant 
does, that we legislate a formal lawfulness to nature so that we can 
make sense of its empirical content. In its Platonic form, the idealism 
of freedom conceives of reason as a formative power that “shapes 
matter into a world” (285). In Christianity, it finds a theistic formu-
lation according to which God creates the world ex nihilo. The sen-
sible world is given a supersensible source. The metaphysics of the 
idealism of freedom is dualistic and discloses polarities between the 
sensible and the supersensible, the immanent and the transcendent, 
the phenomenal and the noumenal.
The third world- view type, which is objective idealism, tends toward 
monism. Dilthey considers objective idealism to be the most pervasive 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
26 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
form of metaphysics. He finds it in “Xenophon, Heraclitus, and Par-
menides, and everything associated with them, in the Stoic system, in 
Giordano Bruno, Spinoza, Shaftesbury, Herder, Goethe, Schelling, 
Hegel, Schopenhauer, and Schleiermacher” (287). Although not part 
of this original list, Leibniz is given special attention because he was 
able to enrich the austere monism of Spinoza with the intuition that 
“every individual thing mirrors the entire universe from its own place” 
(287–88). Leibniz expanded Spinoza’s pantheism into a panentheism 
that still allows God to be thought of as an individual being. “To con-
ceive the universe as a single whole in which each part is determined 
by the ideal meaning nexus of the whole: that is the great new thought 
of Leibniz’s system” (288).
Dilthey also differentiates the three types of world- view accord-
ing to their epistemological- methodical approach. The approach 
of naturalism is to extend the deterministic laws of the physical 
world to what is ordinarily referred to as mind and spirit. The ide-
alism of freedom attempts to derive this kind of natural lawful-
ness from universal formal conditions established by consciousness 
for both cognition and action. It champions the autonomy of the 
life of spirit. The approach that pervades objective idealism is very 
different according to Dilthey. It is rooted in a life- attitude that is 
contemplative, intuitive, and aesthetic. This contemplative attitude 
takes a momentary pause from the work of scientific cognition and 
the purposive strivings of moral action to also evaluate the world 
on the basis of feeling. It is a world- view that links our own being 
with the world as a whole. And “as we expand our own life- feeling 
into a feeling of kinship with the whole world and experience our 
affinity with all the phenomena of what is actual, we find a similar 
increase in our enjoyment of life and the consciousness of our own 
power” (289). The universality of objective idealism moves beyond 
the unilinear and explanative lawfulness of naturalism and the 
dualistic idealism of freedom to an intuitive mode of comprehen-
sive and reciprocal understanding. It is the most systematic type of 
world- view because it discerns inner connectedness throughout the 
world. Yet it too cannot legitimate or justify its claim to be univer-
sally valid. The scientific standard of universal validity is premised 
on delimiting one’s sphere of inquiry. None of the three metaphys-
ical world- view types satisfies that condition because they totalize. 
There is always some gap to fill that leads each of the world- view 
types to spawn “a restless dialectic” (292).
As a hermeneutical thinker and philosopher, Dilthey tends to 
avoid what he sometimes calls the pseudo- logical terminology of a 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
27
dialectic. Life is too complex and the forces active in the world are 
too inter- tangled for any dialectical logic to provide satisfactory an-
swers to our ultimate questions. It is thus revealing that in the con-
text of discussing world- views, he uses the term “dialectic” to point 
to their inner breakdown, whether in terms of the failure of meta-
physical systematization or in terms of their ability to fully capture 
the Zeitgeist or spirit of an historical period. By allowing us to sep-
arate philosophical world- views from their supposed metaphysical 
consummation, Dilthey gives them a more prominent socio- cultural 
relevance. But even when historians appeal to them to characterize 
the Zeitgeist of a period, Dilthey warns that they should not be con-
ceived monolithically. Thus he points out that there will always be 
cultural and other dynamic or productive systems that are not fully 
in tune with their age, and external organizations or institutions 
that still exert power despite having outlived their relevance.19
Although conceptually defined universally valid metaphysical 
systems are beyond our capacity, Dilthey never gave up his faith 
that we can know the world by means of universally valid scientific 
truths. His faith in universal history is not the Hegelian claim to 
know the telos of history in its totality, but the conviction that it is 
possible to cognize the productivity of history in the making. Our 
task is not to project the universality of the whole of history, but to 
discern what is universal in its parts. The hermeneutical challenge 
is to understand individuality as the intersection of universality and 
particularity. This is the spirit of objective idealism without the let-
ter of any metaphysical dogma.
The last essay in this volume is also the last to flow from Dilthey’s 
pen. He wrote it while vacationing in Tyrol, and it is incomplete 
because Dilthey died unexpectedly on October 1, 1911, from an 
outbreak of dysentery there. The essay is entitled “The Problem of 
Religion.” Because religion is deeply rooted in human life and has 
permeated its history, it is important according to Dilthey for both 
its adherents and its opponents to better understand its import. Many 
aspects of human culture such as the arts and philosophy grew nat-
urally out of religion and only gradually became independent. This 
would eventually lead them to challenge religion “insofar as it origi-
nated from a restrictive, dogmatic faith and the pressures exerted by a 
powerful clergy. And this negation uses the weapon of reason to dis-
solve the irrational and transcendent aspects of faith” (298). Dilthey 
19 See Makkreel, Dilthey, Philosopher of the Human Studies (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1992), 394– 399.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
28 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
points to ways in which in ancient Greece, in Rome, and again in 
Arabic culture, an opposition developed between more philosoph-
ical rational religion and positive ritual- based religion. Similarly, 
in the Enlightenment, thinkers such as Lessing and Kant rational-
ized religion and valued it for its moral effects. But these kinds of 
rationalizations capture only part of the essence of what Dilthey 
regards as religiosity. Religion cannot be dialectically sublated into 
philosophy. It contains a mystical core that can only be accessed by 
lived experience. Dilthey finds more promise in the “inner develop-
ment of Christian religiosity” that began with “the Catholic mysti-
cism of Port- Royal, the English and then the American sects, [and] 
German- Protestant Pietism” (301). This renewed sense of religion 
was then deepened by Schleiermacher when he related mystical lived 
experiences to the intuitive insights of the Fichtean phase of tran-
scendental philosophy. Whereas the mysticism of Saint Frances and 
Eckhart was a “rare experience of union with God,” Schleiermach-
er’s mysticism conveys a more “constant consciousness supported 
by a relation to the invisible context of things— a consciousness 
that arises from the recurring effects of this context on the psyche” 
(304). Schleiermacher reinterprets the religious experience as unit-
ing a finite individual with the infinite coherence of things. Whereas 
traditional mystics tend to deprecate this- worldly existence relative 
to a transcendent reality, Schleiermacher’s mysticism affirms and 
sanctifies our life in this world- order. According to Dilthey,
probably the most profound insight of Schleiermacher’s uni-
versal intuition is that the religious lived experience contains 
in itself the basis for explaining the multiplicity of religions 
and the basis for justifying their legitimacy. Religion involves 
intuition and feeling evoked by the effects of the universe on 
the individual subject. Just as our psyche is alerted by the 
senses to the impressions of particular things, so we experi-
ence the universe in the intuitions and feelings that emanate 
from its unity (305).
This allows us to see the multiplicity of religions universalistically 
as a series of creative individuations rather than relativistically as a 
series of contingent particulars.
Dilthey continues by tracking how Schleiermacher influenced 
certain subsequent German theologians. But he also argues that 
the problem of religion should not be relegated to theologians. It 
should be studied from the standpoint of the human sciences in order 
to do justice to religiosity as a felt relation to the invisible. He also 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
IntroductIon to Volume VI 
29
notes approvingly that Carlyle and Emerson “link the religion of 
lived experience— to be sure, as it had developed in their native 
countries— - with German transcendental philosophy” (303). How-
ever, Dilthey reserves special praise for the psychological religious 
insights that can be found in The Varieties of Religious Experience 
of William James. He describes James as someone endowed with 
an astonishing gift for seeing the realities of psychic life. “Uninflu-
enced by previous psychological system building, he possessed the 
resources that came with the acceptance of possible effects stem-
ming from unconscious psychic life. In America, he found himself 
surrounded by sects in which religious lived experience asserted it-
self with great force, independent of tradition.” (312).
Dilthey admits that some of the cases studied in the Varieties are 
rather strange, but on the whole James expands our understand-
ing of religion as only a genius can. Dilthey, who did not relate 
religion to a transcendent world, but discerns in religious experi-
ence a mystical link to an invisible horizon of life, clearly felt an 
affinity with James’s language of our religious sense of “the more.” 
He also admired the contributions of James because he was con-
vinced that the human science of religion needs to be analyzed by a 
philosophically- framed psychology, which is referred to as “anthro-
pology” in the last paragraph of this unfinished essay. This shift is 
important because the study of religion must also consider how our 
subjective experiences objectify themselves in shared practices. We 
saw that Dilthey began his social ethics by looking for an anthro-
pological context for our respect for others. He found this in an 
instinctive sense of solidarity. What is acknowledged here is merely 
an initial and familial sense of kinship or fellow- feeling that can be 
ethically cultivated; solidarity is by no means an endorsement of a 
permanent submission to a collective will. Similarly, the mystical 
experience that Dilthey places at the core of religion is not a state of 
submission or resignation to an otherworldly being, but provides a 
supportive orientation that can activate our engagement with oth-
ers in this life. As Dilthey stated in his “Plan for the Continuation 
of the Formation of the Historical World,” religiosity “points to 
something strange and unfamiliar” in our lived experience, “as if it 
were coming from invisible sources, something <pressing in> on life 
from outside, yet coming from its own depths.”20
20 Dilthey, The Formation of the Historical World in the Human Sciences, SW 
3:285.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
30 
IntroductIon to Volume VI
Like Schleiermacher and James, Dilthey pointed to the centrality 
of lived experience in religion. Yet to capture the essence of religion, 
he also considered it important to follow out the many ways in 
which these experiences have been objectified in historical practices 
and expressed in doctrinal formulations. Unfortunately, Dilthey’s 
unexpected death prevented him from indicating what the proper 
balance should be between these two approaches. One would sus-
pect that some of the universal characteristics among the wide va-
riety of established religions would derive from the same kind of 
processes that Dilthey pointed to in the formation of world- views. 
But since world- views are not as such institutionalized, other socio- 
political forces would need to be considered in order to account for 
doctrinal religions.
This concludes our six- volume edition of Dilthey’s Selected Works. 
All the essays in this volume show that Dilthey made important 
contributions to practical as well as theoretical philosophy. From 
his social ethics to his attempts to put philosophy in a socio- cultural 
context and define its role in refining world- views, Dilthey’s concern 
is to orient us in this life. Just as there is no one world- view type that 
can exhaustively articulate the meaning of life, so there is no simple 
progression from primitive religious manifestations of world- views 
to their artistic and philosophical forms. Personally, Dilthey seems to 
have been most attracted to the philosophical world- view of objec-
tive idealism for its inclusiveness, but also because it most readily 
lends itself to religious and poetic expression.
 
R.A.M
 
F.R.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:05:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
SYSTEM OF ETHICS
(1890)
Translated by  
Stephen W. Ball and Rudolf A. Makkreel
PART I
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ONE
1. The Problem of Contemporary Ethics
Section 1: Only a Life- Based Practical 
Philosophy Can Be Truly Comprehensive
Every true philosophy must derive principles from its theoretical 
insights to direct the life of the individual and to guide society. The 
discipline in which this derivation is conducted is called philosoph-
ical ethics.
The conclusions derived from natural science have led to the re-
jection of Christian morality. We are also seeing an erosion in Euro-
pean literature of ethical conceptions hitherto accepted, and a social 
movement that uses these altered perspectives to strive for the dis-
solution of traditional foundations of society and for a new order 
serving the interests of the working class. All of this imposes upon 
philosophy the task of developing principles that not only can guide 
the life of the individual, but also can provide solutions for the major 
issues of the life of society. Today’s ethics must be a social ethics.
In the structural nexus of psychic life, thinking is interposed, as 
it were, between impression and reaction so that action can result. 
Even the play of children depends on this, as does the whole of cul-
ture. For the animate creature, thought and cognition stand within 
a teleologically structured nexus that extends from perception of 
the external world to a mutual adaptation between the world and 
itself. Thus, the philosophical comprehension of the world also has 
its goal in action. A philosophy that is not conducive to rules for 
practical action is completely unsatisfactory, as is speculation about 
the world that does not offer a perspective on human life or provide 
a guiding impulse for human conduct. Only a life- based, practical 
philosophy can be truly comprehensive. Every theoretical science 
contains presuppositions or principles for attaining certain ends 
X, 13
These lecture notes entitled System der Ethik were first published in Gesammelte 
Schriften (GS) volume X, ed. by Herman Nohl (Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner Verlags-
gesellschaft; and Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1958), 13– 112. Pagination 
in the margins refer to GS X.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
34 
I
assumed to be valuable. The determination of what in life is mean-
ingful and valuable is the task of practical philosophy. Its object 
thus comprises the highest principles through which the means of 
practical action are established and goals posited.
So it is that all great philosophers from Plato and Aristotle to the 
present have secured the ultimate goal of philosophical thinking in 
determinations of the meaning of life and action. Political economy, 
politics, aesthetics, and theology are throughout in need of such prac-
tical principles.
Section 2: The Conditions  
of Contemporary Ethics
There are times when a dominant perspective has been established 
about the goals of action and when society pursues these ends in its 
accustomed ways. In those times there is little interest in practical 
philosophy. By contrast, uncertainty about the principles of action 
in our day generates an extraordinarily strong interest in the study 
of morality. Perhaps not since the great epoch in which Christianity 
emerged from an indescribable social ferment and pronounced the 
redeeming word for those in need has there existed such unrest and 
uncertainty in society. It may be that never before or since have the 
ultimate presuppositions of human life and action been subjected to 
such a degree of erosion.
Characterization of the Present Situation
first fact: The dominance of a natural- science mentality has led 
to the conception of humans as animal beings that, through the 
mechanisms residing within themselves and their milieu, have at-
tained the highest degree of adaptability through their intellectual 
and moral habits. The principles of the psycho- physical unity of 
life and of its development through natural selection, heredity, and 
adaptation have become central to modern biology, and the histor-
ical realm has been subordinated to these principles as well. This 
has produced a religious- metaphysical principle of secularism as the 
ideal of life in Auguste Comte, Herbert Spencer, and Ernst Haeckel, 
and [their] analysis of historical life- forms.
second fact: Next among the historical conditions of this situation 
is the emergence of the social question about the working class and 
14
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
35
its efforts to transform society. This turn of events results from link-
ing changes in societal life with the scientific changes just mentioned.
It has now been a hundred years since the educated middle classes 
fought in the French Revolution to obtain an independent political 
voice and a share in the government. Today, all the strata of society 
below this class strive for a greater share in the goods of life, and 
statecraft assumes the task of making this attainable through the re-
structuring of social institutions. The turbulence concomitant with 
such thoroughgoing change has called into question the ultimate pre-
suppositions of society.
The movement emanating from the working class has at the 
same time become the point of departure for a radical theory. When 
we look beyond these isolated movements and doctrines that have 
been successfully suppressed, this theory can be seen to have unfolded 
and spread continuously from the French Revolution on. In 1796, 
Babeuf1 organized a conspiracy [for equality] directed at the distri-
bution of goods. He was executed in 1797. Henri de Saint- Simon 
drafted a plan for a “physico- political science.” He expounded it 
in Du système industriel (1821– 1822), then popularized it in his 
Catéchisme des industriels (1823– 1824) and in his Nouveau Chris-
tianisme (1825).2 It is based on the abolition of family inheritance. 
All property devolves upon the state at the owner’s death. There is 
only personal property, which must stand in a just relationship to 
work. He founded the socially oriented religious sect of the Saint- 
Simonians. Saint- Simon proceeds from the viewpoint of natural sci-
ence. He demands the full implementation of the secular meaning 
of life. The medieval, feudal- military stage is replaced by a society 
based upon three classes: industrialists, scholars, and artists. Au-
guste Comte, who was born in 1798, was initially a collaborator 
with Saint- Simon and was especially involved with his Catechism 
His own work is Cours de philosophia positive (1830– 42).3 Both 
of these men operate on the basis of a centralized planning of so-
ciety. Fourier’s principle is opposed to this. It allows individuals to 
1 François- Noël Babeuf (1764– 1797), French revolutionary and political 
organizer.
2 These three pieces are excerpted in Claude- Henri (Comte de) Saint- Simon, 
The Political Thought of Saint- Simon, ed. Ghita Ionesco (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1976), Chs. VIII–X.
3 Auguste Comte, The Positive Philosophy, trans. Harriet Martineau (New 
York, AMS Press, Inc., 1974).
15
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
36 
I
follow their own impulses, and a harmonious society is supposed 
to result.4
Socialism developed by denying that property, marriage, and 
family should still be regarded as immutable pillars of society and 
its activities. Socialism can ground itself by drawing the ultimate 
consequences of a very powerful line of thought in natural science. 
If natural selection, heredity, and the animal nature of humans re-
ally are to be viewed as the sole principles of social change, then the 
organization of the forms of life in society can only be grounded on 
these presuppositions.
But socialism acquires its modern scientific form only through the 
combination of these doctrines with modern political economy. Es-
pecially Malthus’s study of populations and Ricardo’s law of wages 
provide it support.5 The main work of modern socialism, Marx’s 
Das Kapital, was built upon it. Lassalle aligned himself with this the-
ory. Its main tenets are uniform throughout Europe. Let us sum up.
1. Socialism derives its underpinnings from the natural sciences. 
Brain physiology and biology apply a general mechanistic ap-
proach to reduce spiritual life to a mere accompanying ap-
pearance (a shadow of what is actual).
2. Philosophically, it holds thought and moral action to be mere 
by- products of animal processes (principle of animalism).
3. The secular nature of life is its principle.
4. It divides history into a theological- militaristic stage that is 
followed by an industrial- scientific stage.
5. It involves an analysis of political economy.
In such a society, capital rules with the necessity of a natural law. 
Its proletariat will grow ever larger so that a minimally bearable 
level of subsistence will prevail. Only an alteration of the existing 
relationships of property, inheritance, marriage, and family makes a 
more just order possible.
third fact: Theology has gradually arrived at a complete analysis of 
Christian history and dogma. In opposition to the Catholic Church, 
4 See Design for Utopia: Selected Works of (François Marie) Charles Fourier, 
trans. Julia Franklin (New York: Schocken Books, Inc., 1971).
5 See Thomas Robert Malthus, Principles of Political Economy (New York: Au-
gustus M. Kelley, Inc., 1951). David Ricardo, “On the Principles of Political Econ-
omy and Taxation,” in The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, ed. Piero 
Sraffa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953), Vol. I.
16
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
37
as the most powerful organized force in the current European world 
with firm moral principles, we find both Protestant orthodoxy and 
religious skepticism. Given these circumstances, theological morality 
no longer exerts a general influence in the Protestant world. Here one 
must be especially careful not to adopt a double [standard of] truth. 
Whoever bases his theological views on Hume, Spencer, etc. and rec-
ognizes the putative results of modern science, cannot hope to vindi-
cate skepticism as the basis of a transcendent world. If ideals are not 
immanent in human nature, then they cannot be made universally 
accessible to human reflection. Accordingly, the choice between utter 
darkness or a world of faith miraculously dispensed from heaven will 
be decided by a free- for- all among our instincts. The decision to be-
lieve will be made only by fools. Thus, either there is an ideality that 
inheres in the world and in the sciences, or none at all.
fourth fact: This struggle against society as it is, has also been ad-
dressed in the ideal domain of art. [There is a] parallelism between 
[current] trends in painting and poetry. While art in the eighteenth 
century contained a redeeming word for the educated, and sub-
sequent formative novels and dramas delineated the idea of inner 
development, the latest inexorable tendency is to find the redeeming 
word for the moral misery of the uneducated classes. Animalism is 
represented by Balzac and Dumas in French art, then by Tolstoy 
and Ibsen.
First Thesis: The world is badly ordered; marriage, family, and 
property relations have become corrupted. Literature should 
depict this truthfully.
Second Thesis: A more auspicious approach is necessary. The 
structure of [contemporary] drama has a doctrinaire tendency 
[to juxtapose] a naturalistic portrayal of things with some 
liberating person. The structure of the novel stresses what 
is inherited, etc. but it lacks the genius of ethical depth. [Its 
current] stress on animalism is pervasive. Tolstoy’s renuncia-
tion of the world is the sister of this masculine animalism and 
bears the same features. Ibsen’s individualism is old- hat for us.
Present European society searches for principles which, under 
quite altered circumstances, can illuminate the meaning of life 
and can define its goal. Everything old is worn out; theories de-
riving from the natural sciences seem to have undermined the very 
foundations that previously gave the elements of society their va-
lidity. Those who invoke the eternal validity of Christianity must 
17
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
38 
I
understand it anew for every age. In its present form it has become 
ineffective. It works for those simple souls who pit their inner expe-
rience against the thrust of modern science, but there is still no one 
with an understanding of Christian truth so new and profound that 
it could serve to determine the times. In this area too, only attempts 
and rudimentary beginnings are available.
Out of this whole situation there arises for philosophy an entirely 
new emphasis attaching to ethical questions, a new demand for eth-
ical principles. In particular, it demands a principle that makes it 
possible to solve the overriding social question. Our effort will not 
involve a renunciation of contemporary sciences. Their legitimacy 
will be maintained, as will those of our social movement. We will 
go beyond the life that the individual leads. Family, property, and 
education will no longer be derived from a traditional principle.
Thus ethics finds itself in a wholly new situation. Its principles 
should provide guidance for the great problems of society.
II
Three Methods Used to Solve the Ethical Problem
Section 3: The Nature of Method [and Its Limits]
We think of a disciplinary method as a procedure regulated by fun-
damental principles that enable us to apply our natural faculties 
of thought to the data of experience so as to achieve a purpose 
connecting thought and action through completely determined con-
cepts and fully justified judgments. One such purpose involves the 
regulation of the life of individuals and of society. This has produced 
various methods. We distinguish three methods in ethics. They are 
differentiated by their choice of principles, mode of argumentation, 
and preference for certain kinds of life- conduct.
Section 4: The Metaphysical Method
The metaphysical method derives constant and universally valid 
principles for evaluating and conducting life from a concept of a 
world system. This metaphysical method has not merely an ab-
stract existence within philosophy, but rather is a component of the 
18
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
39
life- outlook of Indian, Greek, Roman, and Medieval thought. Each 
of us still relies on some abridged version of it.
1. The Metaphysics of a Moral Cosmic Reason and the 
Principle of Ethical Action in a Divine Realm.
[Originally] the value of the forms of the world was derived from 
the goodness and fullness of God’s nature. All human activity com-
pletes, as it were, the work of God in the world. The religious meta-
physics of the Parsees,1 the Greeks, Romans, and Germanic peoples 
draws images and symbols of world coherence from the active eth-
ical consciousness of these peoples, that is, from a feeling of the 
infinite value of life in one’s daily strivings. All subsequent reflective 
contemplation and scientific cognition can only interpret or com-
plete the wisdom of this feeling of life, not transcend it.
 The theoretical, disciplinary expression of this active response 
to life in these leading nations is found in the systems of Pythag-
oras, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Medieval theology and metaphysics, 
the dogmatic teachings of the Reformation and the Protestant sects, 
and finally in deism and rationalism. Since this indigenous meta-
physics can only die out along with these nations themselves, it will 
endure as an indestructible metaphysical consciousness even after 
metaphysical systems have been abandoned.
2. The Metaphysics of Contemplative Reason and the Principle 
of World- Negation.
This kind of metaphysics shows affinities with and in most systems 
combines with the other side of the Indo- Germanic feeling of life, 
namely, a contemplative attitude that comprehends the immutable 
and negates the restlessness of the transitions of life. This appears as 
a naturally- rooted belief in Indian religious speculation. It is also a 
prominent component of Christian dogmatics, especially of Christian 
mysticism. Its monuments include the Vedanta philosophy, Plotinus, 
the writings falsely attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite, Meister 
Eckhart, a Gnosticism of the heart, divine contemplation, and logos 
as redemption through cognition. Its [disciplinary] philosophical 
system can be found in Schopenhauer, but in modern life, peace of 
mind can only be found through scientific thought and in art, not 
in religious mysticism.
1 Zoroastrian sect that emigrated from Persia to India in the eighth century.
19
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
40 
I
3. The Metaphysics of Formative Powers and the Principle  
of Self- Preservation.
The metaphysics of natura naturans and of self- preservation is 
merely a derivative manifestation of this deep, active feeling of life. 
This metaphysics places ethical reason in natural formative pow-
ers rather than in God. Therefore, it substitutes the functioning 
of the life- impulses of the individual, i.e., self- preservation, for 
the infinite value of a progressive process in service of divinely 
grounded values. Its power lies in perfection. Perhaps an indige-
nous metaphysics of this more animate sort is implanted in the 
Celtic and Slavic feeling of life. Epicureans, Hobbes, and natural-
ists since the eighteenth century have represented this standpoint in 
the sciences.
4. The Metaphysics of Materialism and the Principle  
of Animality
This metaphysical system results from a total rejection of the loftier 
views of life. It is supported by the overall movement of the natural 
sciences. 
Critique
1. The principles from which metaphysics begins can only be grasped 
by personal experience and thus they lead back to another 
method. They present themselves as principles that can be proved 
to be universally valid. The proof is supposed to be grounded in 
perception, in a priori logical laws, and operations of thought. 
However: 
a) Perceptions and their connections are subject to critical 
reflection.
b) We do not know whether thought is capable of transcending 
the way things appear.
2. The entire foundation of the metaphysical method is the unprov-
able presupposition of a rational moral cosmic ground and can-
not be given a purely scientific justification.
3. Circularity: an ethical feeling of life and its specification in a so-
ciety determine its primitive conceptions and metaphysical the-
ory, from which in turn ethical principles are derived.
20
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
41
4. Therefore ethical principles will differ in accordance with differ-
ences of race and level of culture. The conflict cannot be resolved. 
Consequently, our starting point must be inner experience.
Section 5: The Method of Inner Experience
The second method is that of inner experience. It determines the 
meaning of life and the goals of action based upon inner experience 
which is given in self- consciousness.
1. The emergence of the principle of inner experience:
Inner experience, detached from all metaphysical presuppositions, 
[provides] a principle for the symbols and images whereby we un-
derstand the world, and belongs, as it were, to the age of wisdom in 
antiquity. The emphasis on the subjective content of inwardness as a 
kind of independence, I find first in the Stoics, the later Academy, and 
Cicero, then more decidedly in the period of the emperors, Seneca, and 
Plotinus. Completely independently, it appears again in Christianity in 
absolute purity. The sayings of Jesus contained in the Gospel of Mat-
thew are no doubt the most original part of what has come to us from 
Christ, and they contain nothing but a powerful, inexhaustibly deep 
ethical consciousness in which the transcendent world is reflected, so 
to speak, like stars in a river. Central to this consciousness is the pecu-
liar link between an active, ethical feeling of life, namely, the teaching 
of a divine realm and the acknowledgment that in the context of this 
life, suffering, abasement, and sacrifice can bring about perfection just 
as much as the advancement of the self and the exertion of force. This 
principle is expressed through conscience (conscientia).
2. In the metaphysical epoch, this new principle of inner experi-
ence could not extricate itself from metaphysical presuppositions. 
The principle of inner experience was reflectively made prominent 
by Augustine, but was corrupted when Christian consciousness was 
transported into metaphysics. The same cloudy mixture appears in 
mysticism. In all of these ethical systems there is a unification of 
both methods, but without any clear consciousness of how to im-
plement the primacy of this second method.
3. The conditions of thought by which it could assert its independence: 
This separation could only become clear- cut after the method of an-
alyzing the contents of experience had dissolved the fundamen-
tal metaphysical concepts of substance, causality, purpose, formae 
21
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
42 
I
naturae, and general essence. Thus the metaphysical bonds of the 
world nexus were destroyed. This took place by way of the Oxford 
school, Locke, and Hume. With it came a depreciation of the validity 
of [traditional notions of] qualities, space, and time. This occurred 
by way of Galileo, Descartes, Locke, Leibniz, and Kant. From this 
point on, the analysis of inner experience was the only way to grasp 
a reality that is metaphysical. All knowledge of nature is just a sym-
bol of the unknown and ultimately unattainable. The first carry- 
over of this method occurred in the domain of ethics.
4. Its Presuppositions:
a) The individual embodies the sufficient basis of the ethical by gen-
erating what is ethical, by being an ethical end in itself and a sover-
eign moral subject. This presupposition was established with great 
clarity by the Reformation movement; its development was espe-
cially energetic in the Protestant sects and in the Reformed Church, 
and from then it was carried over into theism and rationalism. The 
ethical substratum of the eighteenth century can be found in the in-
dependence and ideal directedness of the life of the person. The eth-
ical process has its self- sufficient ground and sole aim in the person.
b) Accordingly, scientific analysis and the capacity to establish rules 
can be based on the factuality of the inner experience of the person. 
Even this proposition is regarded as self- evident. The English relate 
this method to the concept of “intuitionistic ethics.” We Germans 
already have a clear expression for this method, namely, the method 
of inner experience; we need not flirt with the foreign expression as 
though it contained a special wisdom.
c) Thus, this method ultimately appeals to an inextinguishable and 
basic human feeling of moral freedom. Human beings discern a 
difference between the way in which mental processes cohere like 
premises and their conclusion, the way in which pleasant feelings 
and wishes compel psychologically, and the way in which the feel-
ing of volitional independence is connected with the awareness of 
responsibility. It is from the latter that human beings first derive their 
sovereignty. If we were to deny this fact, the mechanistic world would 
be unbearable. <The concept of freedom is not metaphysical— it does 
not assert anything objective. It signifies only a state of conscious-
ness, a feeling that accompanies certain relations in me. We are eth-
ical subjects insofar as we have the feeling of freedom. The method 
22
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
43
of inner experience contents itself with ascertaining this process of 
consciousness. We do not inquire as to the origin of the concepts of 
good and evil, or as to the place where they originated. The method 
of inner experience is analysis, restricted to the analysis of one’s 
own person.>2
d) But this fact must be linked with the relativity of ethical valua-
tion. The limited perspectives of Shaftesbury, Hume, Adam Smith, 
Condillac, Rousseau, and Kant, made a universally valid solution, 
or even an approximation of one, impossible. The conscience of the 
individual provides the basis for the unfolding of the ethical form 
of the individual’s will. This is an attitude toward life, a form of 
the will rather than a determinate content of the will. I distin-
guish as the most general characteristic of the moral form of the 
will, its efforts to overcome the play of instincts— whatever their 
content. Particular ethical principles, however, each express some 
content of life, and this is historically conditioned, i.e., relative. 
Ethical principles and their content exhibit a variability that is 
conditioned by their cultural context. Accordingly, only a consid-
eration of the overall contours of the historical development of 
ethical life, i.e., a socio- historical standpoint, can actually solve 
the problem of ethics.
5. The standpoint of inner experience is also unable to determine 
what constitutes ethical life.
a) Inner experience comprises the instinctive life and self- preservation, 
sympathetic feelings, consciousness of duty and the ethical law, con-
sciousness of the intrinsic value of higher purposes. Inner experience 
attempts to establish a unity within these diverse facts.
b) One can attempt purely methodically to derive higher elements 
from the interaction of lower ones. The method is a kind of psy-
chological experimentation how state A changes into B under con-
dition C. The only proof that this method recognizes is the inner 
re- creation that occurs when there is no resistance.
c) But such resistance does arise when the attempt is made to de-
rive our joy about the pleasure and perfection of others from [our 
2 Inserted by the German editors from lecture notes taken by one of Dilthey’s 
students.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
44 
I
own] self- preservation and instinctive life in a way that is sufficient 
to account for ethical action. Therefore, an independent principle 
of sympathy is assumed by Shaftesbury, Hume, and Adam Smith. 
However, from this one cannot derive commitment, but merely a 
feeling of fellowship or engagement that is a manifestation that can-
not be counted on like Kant’s principle of duty. Furthermore, the 
intrinsic value of higher goods cannot be derived from such feelings 
(Schleiermacher, Hegel, and the principle of ethical values or goods 
that are grounded in practical life).
Thus, within inner experience and the analysis based on it, a war 
of all against all ensues.
d) On the other hand, there is an explanative urge to establish a 
system based on a principle. This led to the unfortunate efforts to 
derive such ethical facts as duty, sacrifice, etc. from the principle of 
self- interest by means of an inner psychological process. The sub-
stance, so to speak, of this inner psychological procedure is simply 
egoism; all other feelings and principles must be derived from the 
particular mental processes of individuals. The English who sup-
plied the grounds for this theory refer to this process as association. 
First, we have the naïvely reflected egoism of the Epicureans. They 
extract the consequence of this principle in graphic Greek terms: 
the happiness of the individual for which society and the state are 
merely instrumental. Peace of mind and friendship in accordance 
with a cosmic principle. The second stage is the English attempt at 
derivation— David Hartley its founder. Through associations sub-
jective feelings of pleasure and their objects are gradually amal-
gamated. These objects become independent bearers of pleasurable 
feeling. The feelings of pleasure become increasingly pure and tran-
quil the more they are extricated from the self. Hume develops 
this standpoint. He made it clear that we attach general feelings 
to certain objects, but he did not elucidate the inherent worth of 
morality.
Section 6: The Method of Studying Moral 
Group- Phenomena, Associations, Organizations, 
and Their Historical Context
The method of studying these phenomena— social associations and 
organizations and their historical context finds the origin of ethical 
rules in the socio- historical communal life of humans and proceeds 
to study the development of humanity in the history of society in 
23
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
45
order to determine the emergence, justification, and value of ethical 
laws.
1. This method was refined scientifically in our century, but it al-
ways presupposes ethical consciousness, as well as a consciousness 
of independence. The real actualization of a higher ethical life, by 
means of the cooperation of individual subjects in associations of 
an ethically productive character, has been attempted multiple times 
in history. The Pythagorean and Platonic schools, the Platonic ideal 
of the state, the great epoch of the Roman republic and its aristoc-
racy, the Christian kingdom of God, the Catholic Church, the mod-
ern ethical bureaucratic state and its ideal in Hegelian politics: these 
are all its practical and theoretical creations. They exhibit a syndes-
mosis in which the attachments of an individual allow a communal 
spirit to shape it inwardly. The presupposition of this syndesmosis is 
that the ethical process is not consummated in isolated individuals, 
but in social and historical communal life. Consequently, the course 
of this process is not to be located in the individual. Whether the 
individual is the only goal remains questionable. Aristotle articu-
lates the principle of substantive Greek ethical life: The detached 
individual is sub-  or super- human; the true human being is a soci-
etal being. The Romans are the people who— by way of the con-
cepts of imperium, communio, officium, obligatio, the separation of 
private and public law, etc.— have put the social conception of the 
individual into practice. The kingdom of God in Christian thought 
has the same effect: “No man comes to the Father but by me”3— 
the Christian principle of community. The underlying problem was 
coexistence with [political] sovereignty. The Catholic Church de-
tached itself from the latter. Even today it is the strongest organized 
socio- ethical power in the world. This is attributable to the fact 
that fixed precepts have linked certain socio- ethical functions with 
fixed needs of human nature. The tenets that sinfulness is a social 
condition, and that the ethical process takes hold of the individual 
only through the medium of the socio- ethical religious whole (ex-
tra ecclesiam nulla salus), are explicit theoretical expressions of the 
Catholic conception of ethical processes.
2. This presupposition corresponds to the methodological proposi-
tion that ethical analysis can only be carried out in the experiential 
3 John 14:6.
24
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
46 
I
realms of socio- ethical group phenomena and their historical 
concatenations.
There are two factions in social ethics: either a human evolution 
in which history is construed as the unfolding of a rational system 
(German theories of development) or evolution as construed by the 
science of biology (French and English theories of development).
a) The German Theory of Development
The Hegelian model: The ethical ethos of the individual is condi-
tioned by the unfolding of the ethos of humanity. The ethical ideal 
inherent in human nature takes shape in the stages of historical life. 
This development is implicit in the nature of the ethical process and 
its rule of self- realization. Absolute values and ends in themselves 
(goods) that extend beyond the individual emerge in this ethical 
process. The method of self- experience in the eighteenth century 
proceeded on the assumptions that the sole basis for the ethical 
processes that occur in the individual is to be found in the individ-
ual, who is the sole end in itself or intrinsic value. The first of these 
assumptions was erroneous and refuted by historicism and the 
historical school. A vital, collective psychic unity, operating in lan-
guage, mythos, or the oldest poetry, generates the historical ethos 
of individual peoples according to Savigny, Grimm, and Niebuhr.4 
The other assumption was questionable. Here is the deepest prob-
lem of historical and ethical reality: <How does a communal spirit 
relate to the life of the individual? The doctrine of original sin and 
the communal process of salvation are in accordance with such a 
theory. Sciences exist not for the sake of the learned, but rather they 
serve the great process by which consciousness becomes ever clearer 
about the coherence of the world.>5
b) The Biological Theory of Evolution in France and England.
Such a theory could make its appearance only after biological science, 
modern anthropology, the science of history as legitimated by the 
Germans, and moral statistics began to cooperate.
4 Friedrich Karl von Savigny (1779– 1861), German legal scholar who empha-
sized that law is a product of the popular spirit of a nation (Volksgeist). Jacob Lud-
wig Karl Grimm (1785– 1863), and his brother, Wilhelm Karl Grimm (1786– 1859), 
philologists well- known for their collection of fairy tales, were influenced by Savigny 
while studying law at the University of Marburg in 1802– 1806. Barthold Georg 
Niebuhr (1776– 1831), German historian. His influential work, Römische Ge-
schichte, began a new era of historiography based on scientific historical scholarship.
5 Inserted by the German editors.
25
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
47
It contains quite new material for a solution to the ethical prob-
lem. It cannot yet be ascertained whether by itself or in conjunction 
with the other methods it can supply a complete solution. But in any 
case, it contains the means for an external, empirical treatment of 
the problem which allows for partial, limited observations and on 
their basis arrives at sufficient principles. This method is reinforced 
when related to a limited use of the method of inner experience.
The biological theory of evolution takes its point of departure 
for morality in English utilitarianism and serves as a scientific 
crutch for it. Jeremy Bentham, a contemporary of the French Revo-
lution, sought a principle that would circumvent such convulsions. 
His main work, Traité de legislation, was extracted from Bentham’s 
writings and published in 1801 by Etienne Dumont and translated 
into German in 1830 by Beneke6 with valuable additions.7 Bentham 
sought a principle for the guidance of society, for legislation. He 
defined his goal as “the greatest good of the greatest number” or 
“maximum happiness.”
But there was the problem of relating intensity and extension, 
and then the problem of social order. Solution: Happiness increases 
with wealth; not, however, in the same ratio, but more slowly. Ac-
cordingly, with an equal distribution [it should be at a] maximum. 
This would lead to communism, but the infringement of private 
property endangers security. Security is a condition for all other 
goods. Thus, the atomistic conception of society, together with the 
utilitarian system, necessarily leads to socialism. The meaning of 
this principle, apart from its foundation, was in keeping with the 
political life of the eighteenth century. As a calculus of pleasure, it 
was indeed obscure, but it was valuable as a rule of averages. Its 
deficiency has to do with motivation. John Stuart Mill was the first 
to give a thorough treatment of this question in his book Utilitar-
ianism. For the qualitative determination of value he had only a 
public standard. Its obligatory force arises from the fact that calcu-
lations about the striving for individual well- being make use of un-
conscious and obscure feelings. This, however, is only conceivable if 
it occurs not in the individual, but rather in social evolution.
The third necessary link is Herbert Spencer. He had the elements 
of evolutionary theory already before Darwin, but his late work, 
6 Friedrich Eduard Beneke (1798– 1854), German philosopher and psychologist.
7 Several English translations. See An Introduction to the Principles of Morals 
and Legislation, ed. by J. H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London 1970; Methuen paper-
back edition, 1982: with introduction by Hart).
26
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
48 
I
The Data of Ethics8 (German trans. by Vetter, 1849) rests entirely 
upon the doctrines of adaptation and heredity. The life of a human 
being must constantly be adapted to its conditions. Consequently, 
any principle that promotes adaptation and leads to a normal life is 
ethical. From this arises a relativism of ethical principles.
This standpoint dissolves into one of equating what is ethical 
with health. Animals, too, are ethical, and certainly the actions by 
which adaptation occurs are not intrinsically valuable, but mere 
means— work performed to attain pleasure. If all of this is ethically 
unsatisfactory, the method and manner by which it is implemented 
is physiologically untenable. We can grasp that with biological evo-
lution new connections of nerves, and thus dispositions for more 
complicated reflex processes, develop. But a hereditary formation 
of nerve cells, whereby they become carriers of entire systems of 
representations and of inner moral dispositions, is, physiologically 
speaking, nonsense. Add to this the fact that the entire theory of 
heredity in this form has been called into question by Weismann.9
Section 7: The Conflict of Methods Shows 
the Need for an Epistemological and Critical 
Foundation of Ethics
The conflict of methods gives rise to the need for an epistemological 
and critical foundation of ethics.
1. None of these three methods has been capable of interpreting the 
facts of the ethical world and deriving universally valid principles 
of action.
The system of our cognitive representations is closely tied to the 
formation of our feelings and our instinctive life, and all of them to 
our actions. But while in metaphysical theory ethical motivations 
are supposed to arise from theoretical considerations, in the natural 
metaphysics of European peoples we see the opposite, namely, a 
world- view emerging from active ethical motivations. This accords 
with the structure of thought in Plato and Kant.
8 English version published by A. L. Burt Co., New York, Spencer’s preface dated 
1879.
9 August Weismann, German biologist (1834– 1914), known for his theory that 
heredity is based on germ plasm, which is independent of the external environment 
(rejection of Lamarck’s theory of acquired characteristics).
27
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
49
2. The circularity of the metaphysical method:
A structural system can only produce genuine principles when 
cognitive results are gathered and subordinated to some volitional 
end. No theory that has a purely theoretical origin can influence 
life. The overstepping into metaphysical generalizations can only be 
justified in volitional terms. We know that something higher oper-
ates or works itself out in the nexus of the world only insofar as we 
can derive it ethically. Schleiermacher correctly saw that for us the 
absolute can only be given through such an inference.
3. The metaphysical method accommodates itself, then, to all stand-
points. The majority of human world- view systems do not contra-
dict the method of inner experience, because inner experience has 
determined them. In all circumstances the point of departure is in-
ner experience. The territory of inner experience alone is stable and 
reliable. On this alone can metaphysical consciousness be grounded, 
and consequently only a critical treatment of the external world is 
capable of reconciling inner experience, a consciousness of the in-
telligibility of the world and the cognitive results of natural science.
4. Similarly, only critical consciousness can reconcile the theory of 
evolution and the facts of inner experience. The theory of evolution— 
which assumes a mechanistic system of nature, an epiphenomenal 
account of psychic processes and the derivation of evolution from a 
blind mechanism of the milieu, i.e., ultimately chance— must reduce 
ethical development to an irrelevant appearance accompanying the 
course of the world in its massiveness and necessity. These ethical 
processes are reduced to an affliction that strains consciousness but 
is powerless to change anything in the course of the world. It would 
remain the same without these correlated processes.
5. Thus, there exists a struggle between the lower and higher impulses 
in humanity, between the sensory, cognitive world- picture and uncur-
tailed inner experience in history. This is the ultimate cause of the 
insoluble conflict of human systems of metaphysics. Only through 
self- reflection can it be settled. Ethics is possible only on the basis 
of self- reflection.
At this point utilitarianism offers itself as a kind of ethical philos-
ophy of compromise. Today it dominates European ethics especially 
because it appears to offer a practical and theoretical compromise 
between warring modes of conviction.
28
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
50 
I
After having long prevailed in England, utilitarianism is now 
in disarray there. But it has become a kind of bourgeois philos-
ophy in Germany. The thesis that ethics can be legitimated only 
by self- reflection and a critical consciousness— rising above sensory 
appearances and mere intellectual considerations— must be corrob-
orated by a critique of utilitarianism. This is our first task in gaining 
a critical foundation of ethics.
III
Utilitarianism as a Compromise between a Sense- Based 
Cognitive Perspective and Ethical Consciousness
Section 8: The Concept of Utilitarianism  
and Its Stance
As I consider the application of these methods in contemporary eth-
ical works, only two systems emerge as truly deserving of thorough-
going criticism. The first finds its complete, classical formulations in 
utilitarianism and is conspicuous in its effects. The other is present 
in the writings of the great historians, in the aspirations of our great 
statesman, but is not yet systematically worked out. It points to a 
psychological, historical principle and to cultural strivings.
At first, utilitarianism was the heir to the European system of 
natural morality and religion as well as natural law. This older sys-
tem of the eighteenth century and the Enlightenment had its classi-
cal representatives in Leibniz, Locke, Rousseau, Kant, and Lessing. 
Whatever their differences, they agreed in the assumption that rea-
son inheres in the systems of human culture and that it is capable 
of developing a rational coherence among them, which contains the 
principles of practical action.
This [natural] system had a devastating effect on the feudal, ab-
solutist Catholic social order of France. In the French Revolution it 
proved itself capable of demolishing this order, but in its attempt at 
creating a new ethical order it proved to be bankrupt. In contrast, 
the same system in Germany, principally under the rule of Frederick 
the Great, brought about a genuine reform.
29
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
51
The utilitarian system emerged in England in the third and fourth 
decades of the nineteenth century.
 Section 9: Jeremy Bentham
1. The Principle [of General Well- Being]
The founder of the movement, Bentham, developed the principle 
of general well- being. All legislative acts and laws of customary 
morality should, according to this principle, serve as the basis for 
directing the will toward general well- being, and indeed Bentham 
refines this principle as that of the greatest possible happiness of the 
greatest number of people. He also demands that in establishing 
standards of action no other idea is to exert any influence.
With this principle he illuminates the complex and immense edi-
fice of political and legal life. Inexorably, he demonstrates the irreg-
ularity and inexpediency of this edifice compared with the modern 
idea of comfort. He does not ask what interests, motives, and in-
fluences have determined that existing formation. He does not ask 
what functions have been and are exercised there. He judges the old 
edifice by his modern principle and finds that little of it is worth 
preserving.
Thus, Bentham’s critique is revolutionary. It judges from the 
outside— from an abstract principle— what was formed on the basis 
of historical functions. If one concedes that this is legitimate, then 
Bentham obtains the right to his procedure of destruction. But his 
standpoint is not consistent when he holds on to the interests of the 
bourgeoisie, for the consequence of his standpoint is socialism.
2. The Means of Making This Principle Applicable 
to Legislation.
a) The Task and Its Meaning:
Bentham undertakes to discover a method by which this principle 
can be made useful for the concrete solution of legislative and socio- 
ethical problems. In this great endeavor, he can be designated as the 
founder of modern ethics, namely, social ethics, since every earlier 
system— for lack of intermediaries between principles and practical 
tasks— had made an impact only on the disposition of human indi-
viduals, but not on the practice of the affairs of nation- states.
30
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
52 
I
b) The Nature of the Solution:
This task demands that the values of feelings of pleasure and dis-
pleasure can be comprehensively surveyed, that they can be defined 
for specific tasks. Bentham’s talent for tabulating and measuring 
the imponderable and incomprehensible is reminiscent of Mr. Pick-
wick. He selects as the determining factors of measurement: 1) in-
tensity, 2) duration, 3) certainty, and 4) proximity.
 To them he adds 5) the consideration of whether these feelings 
in combination with each other will bring about others of a con-
trary kind. He stresses as an additional factor of appraisal 6) the 
dissemination of goods or evils among a certain number of people. 
Most useful for the implementation of the utilitarian system is 
Bentham’s ranking of evils. The harm to a person that arises directly 
from an action is designated as an evil of the first order. Thus, loss 
of property or of life by murder is an evil of the first order. From 
this he distinguishes the evil that attaches to a harmful action in-
directly or over the course of time. Thus, every single act of theft 
reinforces a feeling that endangers the institution of property and 
over the course of time a dissolution of the enterprising spirit, a 
diminution of the sense of justice. This consideration suggests that 
not only actions conducive to evils of the first order are objectionable, 
but also that actions that have no harmful first- order consequences 
at all or have even useful consequences of the first order may be just 
as objectionable— and in fact, according to the highest principle, 
objectionable to a greater degree— in that harmful consequences of 
a second or third order extend to the larger part of society. Bentham 
takes into consideration also the way in which temperament, health, 
education, occupation, and the power of goods or evils, influence our 
state of mind.
c) The Inadequacy of the Solution— Criticism:
It is obvious that in the actual world, the affairs of state and the 
deliberations of legislators are constantly influenced by calculations 
of this sort. Every law proposed by some corporate body or other 
in Europe must be justified in terms of the influence it has on the 
welfare of the populace. But the calculation of the legislator cannot 
attain its [proper] outcome by a measurement of feelings. It must 
proceed from the way standards for the household of social life 
function and become discernible whenever needs manifest them-
selves. Any proposal is to be measured for its value relative to the 
functions of a social body, and outwardly for the urgency of the 
need. A military budget cannot be decided upon by a calculation 
31
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
53
of the painful feelings it prevents. The conclusion to be drawn for 
scientific deliberation is that Bentham’s task is insoluble; a standard 
for quantitative estimation is lacking; the possibility of adding sums 
of feelings is lacking; and finally, the indifference of consciousness, 
assumed by Bentham, regarding qualitative distinctions is merely 
a hypothesis that is not in harmony with the human feeling of life. 
One need only observe that contents are strived for and enjoyed. In 
terms of the satisfaction that I seek in life, it is the same according 
to Bentham, whether I eat oysters or contemplate a scientific prop-
osition. The basic deficiency of his theory is its atomistic approach 
and its detachment from actual drives and needs.
This consideration leads, then, to the conclusion that Bentham’s 
conception must be replaced by a socio- historical one that proceeds 
from human drives and the functions of society.
3. The Stabilization of this Principle Through the Establishment 
of a Sanction:
Bentham must again, like the great Mr. Pickwick, compile and tab-
ulate. There are four kinds of sanction: 1) the physical sanction, i.e., 
pleasure and displeasure follow from the course of nature = law 
of nature; 2) the moral sanction, i.e., the feelings of other persons 
evoked by a mode of action = Locke’s law of public opinion; 3) 
the political sanction, i.e., the consequences that attach to certain 
actions based on the law and authority = rewards and punishments. 
Already Hobbes and Locke stressed the influence of this force upon 
the formation of customs. 4) The religious sanction, i.e., consequences 
attached to an action based on religious belief. They are simply reg-
istered by Bentham without comment.
The basic law of the sanction lies in the strengthening of one’s 
motivational power by a combination of various sanctions; their 
invariable basis is what is natural. As the consequences work to-
gether, or intersect in an action, a strong relationship is established 
between action and the impression that it is good or bad. Its effects 
on conscience are not mentioned. That is no coincidence. The pangs 
of conscience and remorse in ourselves are simply the result of ex-
ternal relations. The main question of ethics becomes: Is conscience 
merely a reflex of the external consequences of actions?
32
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
54 
I
Section 10: John Stuart Mill
I. Battle against the Idealistic Faction of the School  
of Inner Experience
Mill’s investigation of the foundations of morals is, in its essential 
starting point, completely reminiscent of Hume’s inquiry into the 
principles of morality, which in terms of content and form is the 
greatest work of British ethics.
Moral discriminations as such are an undeniable fact of human 
life. We call certain actions and inclinations right and others wrong 
insofar as they are approved or disapproved. We have pleasant feel-
ings when considering actions and inclinations of the first kind, 
and opposite feelings when considering the second kind. Everyone is 
aware of the fact that these feelings are not identical with our ordi-
nary feelings of pleasure and pain.
Two opposing theories attempt to explain these universally known 
and acknowledged phenomena: the idealist theory and the empiricist 
or positivist theory. Mill no doubt exaggerates the contrast between 
these two directions, for only at a few points of their development do 
they oppose each other as bluntly and exclusively as he portrays it. It 
is certainly a recurring characteristic of idealist ethics, however, that 
the distinction between right and wrong is regarded as an ultimate 
and not further derivable fact, as the work of a sui generis faculty, and 
that the accompanying feelings are designated as being as specific as 
some classes of sensory perception. By contrast, the empiricist school 
regards ethical claims much more as products of a highly advanced 
psychological development, compound phenomena to be analyzed 
by the same principles applied to other compound ideas and feelings, 
and above all it emphasizes the connection, denied by the intuitionist 
school, between these phenomena and human happiness.
The forcefulness and decisiveness with which Mill reacts against 
the intuitionist school makes it patently clear how little the recog-
nition of the intellectual acuity of a Plato, a Coleridge, or a Carlyle, 
was capable of deceiving him about the deficiencies of those theo-
ries. If the intuitionist hypothesis with its presuppositions is really 
to be taken seriously, it is for Mill not much more than a flexible 
tool for glorifying prejudices and dismissing consideration of any 
deep- rooted belief or any feeling whose origin does not lie within the 
reach of memory.
Much that Mill says in this context sounds as though it is im-
mediately directed against Carlyle, who of all the adherents of the 
33
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
55
intuitionist school has exerted the most intellectual influence in En-
gland. Never have issues concerning the most profound problems 
of the practical content of life been approached with the impetuous 
and passionate appeal to immediate feelings and powers of imagi-
nation that Carlyle uses to override all scientific methods of investi-
gation in ethics and social philosophy. More poet than philosopher, 
this inspired and spirited man has without question had a great 
impact on human minds, but Mill saw perfectly clearly that one can 
stir up excitement in this way without drawing closer to the actual 
demands of such difficult issues.
 The contrast between an ethic that appeals to the external crite-
ria of pleasurable and unpleasurable consequences, and one that is 
grounded only on inner conviction, is tantamount to the contrast be-
tween progress and a standstill in ethics, the contrast of an incessant, 
intelligent scrutiny and the worship of traditional customs. If we are 
to take the intuitionist theory seriously, we need to inspect it more 
closely and note that everything of practical use which that theory 
has contributed (i.e., all attempts to deduce and establish its norms) 
has been achieved at the price of consistency. Even theories which in 
principle reject external criteria (i.e., consideration of probable con-
sequences) rely very extensively upon them, though  admittedly in a 
disguised way. Mill has emphatically drawn our attention— as did 
Schopenhauer, Beneke, and Feuerbach before him in Germany— to 
the fact that Kant’s very attempt to derive the maxims of his gen-
eral lawgiving will from pure reason collapses into an objectionable 
attentiveness, bordering on the comical, about the possible conse-
quences of a particular action. Even Fichte’s form of the ethic of 
the categorical imperative escapes this difficulty only by representing 
the entire concrete structure of ethics as a necessary means for im-
plementing a supreme purpose, namely, the pure autonomy of the 
rational being (which admittedly has nothing more to do with indi-
vidual purposes) and by magically incorporating into this principle 
the entire content of the most perfect life. In this way one can protest 
against the doctrine of happiness and uphold an ethical concept of 
beatitude while secretly concealing within it something that pos-
sesses the same force as the simple and expanded feelings of value 
that eudaemonism openly exalts as its ethical principle.
34
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
56 
I
2. The Happiness Principle in Mill
1. The Principle
The version of the happiness principle that Mill gives is the follow-
ing: The ultimate goal of all human action, or the highest good in 
accordance with ancient philosophy, for the individual as for the 
species, is an existence as free from pain and as rich in pleasure 
as possible. Both are understood in terms of quantity as well as of 
quality, and of course the judgment of those whose experience is the 
richest and whose consciousness is the most fully mature is decisive. 
This ultimate goal of all action is at the same time necessarily the 
criterion of what is ethical.
2. The Standard of Measurement
This standard is not arbitrary, but rather is given in nature and 
experience. Judgments of comparative value can be made only by 
those who can compare based on acquaintance with diversity. No 
one would expect enlightenment about this from animals or from 
crude, sensual people who have never been acquainted with other 
kinds of enjoyment. When learned and thoughtful people are con-
sulted, the result is the indubitable fact that there exist qualitative 
differences in feelings of happiness and unhappiness. That Mill 
stresses this is all the more interesting since its denial has led mod-
ern German pessimists to many of their most startling sophistries. 
Quite apart from ethical considerations, not a single person who 
has become capable of generating purely intellectual and social 
feelings even to a limited extent would want to exchange the capac-
ity for such feelings for the greatest number and uninterrupted du-
ration of purely sensual pleasures. This proposition is confirmed 
by the often- made observation that, conversely, dissatisfaction 
with life in relatively favorable circumstances is as a rule the result 
of intellectual narrowness and egoistic self- limitation. To be sure, 
the more limited the mental organization of a being is, the easier 
that being is to satisfy, and the more highly developed one’s spir-
itual development and the more manifold one’s needs, the more 
difficult it is to find happiness. But those natural distinctions of 
value between different forms of consciousness, independent of 
any misfortunes in the course of one’s life, continue to be factu-
ally based: They are the foundation of everything which one calls 
“human dignity.”
35
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
57
3. This Ethic Is Also Valid for Pessimists
Even pessimists— indeed, especially pessimists— must admit the va-
lidity of this conception, for the lower their estimation of the actual 
value of life, the more assuredly they measure precisely this unwor-
thiness with respect to their ideal of happiness. Even if they regard 
happiness as unattainable, they must applaud all attempts to alleviate 
and reduce present suffering in the world. If nothing more, the util-
itarian ethic can at least lend support to this negative eudamonism. 
But Mill is far removed from the pessimistic conception of life. Mill 
certainly sees with the unreserved clarity of the pessimist, all the infir-
mities and defects of life as it is, but this bleak condition of existence 
can be viewed as attributable to a deficient organization of human so-
ciety, to the inadequate cultivation of our knowledge and our will— it 
is neither inevitable nor the last word about human development.
4. Moral Norms
Thus, one can define the ethical in Mill’s sense as the sum of human 
behavioral norms, the compliance with which would most exten-
sively bring about such a state of happiness.
It goes without saying that this state of happiness, which appears 
as the goal of ethical behavior, can be understood only as those con-
stituents of happiness which are dependent on the human will and 
the orderly accord of human strivings, and by no means as those 
constituents conditioned by relations of nature and the unpredict-
able play of chance. One might observe, then, that the officially cited 
version of Mill’s formula has been given somewhat too absolute an 
expression, which fits our contemporary ethical ideal, to be sure, but 
is not quite so well suited to historical application. This discrepancy is 
not difficult to produce when one defines the ethical as the totality 
of norms through which, in the judgment of the intellectually pre-
eminent men of every age and every people, the greatest sum of hap-
piness in the sphere of human society would be produced, and when 
the latter concept of society is gradually elevated from a limited us-
age encompassing those united by ethnic or national affiliation or 
faith to an ever more universal conception. 
3. Rebuttal of Objections against Utilitarianism
The proposed principle is, then, subject to a series of objections.
Pleasure and pain— or in an expanded sense, happiness and 
unhappiness— are the sole incentives of all action. This proposition 
36
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
58 
I
is pitted against the preferred view that the ethical good is instead 
to be pursued “for its own sake.” What does “for its own sake” 
mean? Obviously, nothing other than that the ethical is an end at 
which we remain standing and linger because our consciousness 
of the ethical provides contentment and the absence of it pains 
us. Thereby we merely disregard other aims and comforts that 
we may intend to achieve by ethical means, but in no way from 
all consideration of pleasure and pain entirely. But is there then 
no difference between what is ethical and feelings of pleasure? 
Undoubtedly in certain cases there is, but one must not exaggerate 
it. In every age, and for every individual in particular periods of 
his development, certain constituents of the ethical are pursued 
not for their own sake, i.e., due to the enjoyment immediately 
 attached to them, but rather as means to the ends of avoiding 
other unpleasantness or attaining other enjoyment. Gradually, 
however, by virtue of an endlessly repeated transformation in hu-
man life, what was previously valuable only as a means becomes 
now an end in itself, i.e., an object of pleasurable and unpleasur-
able feelings.
In exactly the same way that Fichte, Hegel, and Feuerbach had 
done, and as every penetrating ethical theory must do, Mill calls 
attention to the partial opposition between inclinations and drives 
on the one hand, and the will, i.e., aspiration clarified and refined 
through developed reproduction and intellectual activity, on the 
other. While idealist theories place in the foreground the active im-
petus of the operation of reason, Mill emphasizes much more the 
force of habit by which the will, originally dependent upon incli-
nations and drives, finally acquires a certain independence. Con-
sequently, due to deeply formed associations, it strives for things 
which originally aroused no immediate inclination, and certain 
ends are willed not because they are desired, but rather they appear 
desirable because we will them. This is a process that cannot fail 
to exist even in the ethical development of the most independent 
natures and is plainly the rule for the great majority of people. The 
beginning of ethical education is not otherwise possible than by 
associating right with pleasure and wrong with pain and having the 
novice immediately experience both pleasurable and painful feel-
ings. Only in this way does the will gradually attain the readiness 
to want and attach enjoyment to things that were originally re-
mote and that have no immediate value for it, but rather are valued 
only by virtue of a general appraisal as prerequisites to universal 
happiness.
37
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
59
What is ethical is therefore conceivable only as a product of de-
velopment. This is the insight resulting from these considerations 
and with which Mill, on the one hand, has in the most favorable 
way filled a perceptible gap in the older Humean conception and, 
on the other hand, has strongly anticipated the later evolutionism 
with its ancillary psychology of association. Mill already recognized 
both directions in this development, which were later distinguished 
as the autogenetic and psychogenetic: Over the course of genera-
tions and through accumulated human experiences, a criterion of 
ethical evaluation with its particular demands emerges, and we find 
individuals adapting to the resulting norms. The development of 
this criterion is so far from being incomprehensible that one must 
only wonder how such an evident process could be enveloped in so 
much darkness. Each person knows on the whole quite well what 
he expects from others, what he finds pleasing and hurtful in them, 
and it would surely be odd if from this there did not arise, for each 
age and each people, a notion of what everyone wants from others, 
a standard of judging in accordance with a “general well- being.”
Admittedly, however, this evaluation of the individual from the 
standpoint of others according to their standards and expectations, 
as was demonstrated also by Feuerbach in an entirely analogous 
way, is by no means entirely the same as one’s own judgment about 
what others expect of us— nor obviously identical with what we 
want ourselves. For this very reason it is a complete misunderstand-
ing of utilitarianism to accuse this principle of eliminating all re-
nunciation or sacrifice. All that utilitarianism says is that even acts 
of self- denial must have a eudaemonological background if they 
are to be ethically valid, that they have to be legitimized as some-
how means to promoting this final purpose. Utilitarian ethics has 
learned from human history what a tough and unremitting struggle 
it is in every age and for every people to wrest from the natural in-
stincts of individuals what it holds as valuable and to enforce this. 
Almost all estimable qualities of humanity are the result, not of 
natural instincts, but rather of a victory of reflection and deliberate 
volition over the instincts. Courage, truth, and purity are instilled 
in humans by training. Everywhere individual persons must first 
have developed ethical qualities through their distinctive capacities 
before these can be apprehended as duties. And certainly, the im-
possibility of determining the consequences of an action in a given 
case will not be permitted as a valid objection against the utilitarian 
principle, for between the highest principle and a particular action 
there are maxims, evaluations about kinds of actions and character 
38
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
60 
I
traits, which are used to make a judgment. These [maxims and eval-
uations] provide a wealth of moral concepts whereby our heritage 
educates us. It is unnecessary to rack one’s brains considering how 
the murder of a human being could affect the common good.
4. Conclusions
Mill’s honesty and broad- mindedness allow him to recognize the 
full difficulty of making comprehensible on the basis of his founda-
tion, the motive for caring about the well- being of others, and here 
his own principle leads, then, to its opposite. Not because, as Jodl1 
indicates, utilitarians and idealists agree in acknowledging that the 
ethical is a property of the person and that this property consists in 
the unselfish willing of an objective or universal good. The reason 
is, rather, that Mill lapses into an erroneous circle in that he evokes 
the help of education and legislation. Education is supposed to link 
human happiness and actions having common utility; legislation is 
supposed to bring individual interest and the public interest into the 
greatest possible harmony. It assumes that education can generate 
an illusion after genuine enthusiasm has been theoretically annihi-
lated. Over the years, Mill became increasingly inclined to sacrifice 
the logical implications of his principle to the feelings that promote 
human happiness. The harmony produced by legislation is certainly 
in line with the tendency of the principle, but only in the narrow 
sphere where laws can affect ethical actions.
In case of a conflict Mill seeks a more deeply rooted moral mo-
tive, a sanction for the ethical duty to advance common utility. Even 
though he declares the existence of moral feelings to be doubtful, 
he falls back on the doctrine of sympathy. Indeed, when he bases his 
expectations on the religious doctrine of the unity of individuals with 
other persons around them, an innate moral disposition and an obscure 
metaphysical assumption become the refuge of a desperate utilitarian-
ism. Mill refuses to see that such a metaphysical underpinning involves 
the abolition of the atomistic suppositions from which the maximum 
of happiness originated. Still more decisive is the bankruptcy of 
Mill’s principle of utility concerning freedom. Here Mill— in uni-
son with Pestalozzi, Humboldt, and Goethe— pits the principle of 
individual development over against the socialistic mechanization 
of society. While he postulates a duty of self- development, no motive 
for this is available in the utilitarian system. This is indicative, rather, 
1 Friedrich Jodl (1849– 1914), leading proponent of German positivism.
39
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
61
of a disposition in human nature, which must be an abomination to 
a genuine utilitarian. Thus, in a curious development— which Mill 
himself, not without self- flagellation, has portrayed— utilitarianism 
dissolves itself.
Section 11: General Critique of Utilitarianism
Without introducing any hypotheses, one can confront the utilitar-
ian system with the following general considerations. The system in 
its English form relies ultimately upon the assumption of a natural 
harmony between personal well- being and the common good. This, 
however, is not harmony in the sense of the well- known words of 
the German emperor Charles V: “My brother, Francis I (king of 
France) and I are in agreement— we both want the same thing.” The 
assumption is, rather, that action for the common good that is in 
accordance with the natural arrangement of society will also always 
best provide for others. But this is the case only when, and to the ex-
tent that, legislation and education accomplish such a result. Thus, 
if utilitarianism is to be maintained, the system of individual liberty 
must be given up and replaced with a system in which individuals 
are guided even in their innermost convictions. The same phenom-
enon occurs, then, in the sphere of morality that has taken place in 
the field of political economy. The older English economy could be 
traced back by Bastiat2 to the principle of the natural harmony of 
interests in economic life. Mill was a chief proponent of this theory. 
But more recent developments in political economy prove, as does 
life itself still more clearly, that this is a fiction. On the assumption 
of the right to inherit, society left to itself falls prey to capitalism; 
every legal decree is a regulative power amid economic interests. 
Consequently, in the sphere of social ethics Mill’s utilitarianism has 
had to relinquish its dominance to the principle of directing society 
toward the establishment of public well- being— i.e., to make way 
for the principle of socialism and its philosopher, Auguste Comte.
This result obtains also from the following consideration. Util-
itarianism was an extremely congenial doctrine for the bourgeoi-
sie as long as it was used merely to eradicate the remains of a 
feudal, ecclesiastical order. Utilitarianism entered into an alliance, 
then, with the radical liberalism of the bankers in England. As 
2 Frederic Bastiat (1801– 1850), French economist who advocated free enter-
prise and the view that the pursuit of economic self- interest would promote the 
common good.
40
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
62 
I
soon, however, as the principle of maximum happiness no longer 
possesses the propriety and modesty to respect property and the 
right of inheritance, it becomes evident that this principle leads 
undeniably to a socialistic system, to social democracy. As Ben-
tham candidly recognizes, the greatest possible happiness of the 
greatest possible number is the only possible formula when one 
takes the totality of equally valued statistical units and adds up 
their quanta of pleasure. He recognized further the influence on this 
calculation of the principle developed by Bernoulli in his mensura 
sortis.3  According to Bernoulli, the increment in well- being brought 
about by a profit is inversely proportional to the wealth already 
available.4 According to Bentham, the growth in happiness due to a 
limited good is proportional not to the magnitude of the good, but 
rather to the ratio between this and the sum of the goods already 
possessed by the individual. As concerns the distribution of wealth 
and the particular possessions that comprise it, this implies that a 
given quantity which would have doubled a poor person’s means to 
happiness will guarantee only a negligible increase for a rich person, 
and consequently the maximum happiness in a given society can be 
achieved only by a roughly equal distribution of the resources for 
enjoyment. To this must be added the fact that feelings generated 
by the contrast [between rich and poor] bring less happiness to the 
minority than the pain they create for the great majority.
Thus, we are led over to the other side of utilitarianism, which 
today has seized upon this principle: the morality of socialism.
Hume once supported the unfortunate Jean- Jacques Rousseau 
and brought him to England— the success of which is well known. 
Then John Stuart Mill at a later date became interested in Comte; 
his attention became fixed on this great philosopher prominent in 
France. It was the attractive power that a superior form of the util-
itarian principle had to exert on the English.
<But there is also a circularity in Comte’s viewpoint which hin-
ders a solution. If the goal is happiness, it is not logical to sacrifice my 
3 Daniel Bernoulli (1700– 1782), Swiss mathematician and scientist. The cited 
work is a paper entitled “Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis,” which was 
written in c. 1730– 31, and published in 1778 in Commentarii academiae imperialis 
Petropolitanae; German edition trans. Alfred Pringsheim, Die Grundlage der mod-
ernen Wertlehre (1896), i.e., the “Foundation of Modern Value Theory.”
4 That is, roughly what has come to be known in economics as the “principle of de-
creasing marginal utility.” See discussion of Bernoulli’s hypothesis in Joseph A. Schum-
peter, History of Economic Analysis (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), 303ff.
41
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
63
own happiness, which I have in hand, for the benefit of others. Eu-
daemonism amounts to no more than the psychological illusion of 
morality. Our actual motives are quite different. A thirst for revenge 
with the destruction of oneself— self- sacrifice. The genius dedicates 
his life to scientific tasks. The powerful live out their passions and 
impulses. The great achievements of history could not have been 
produced merely by eudaemonism.>
Section 12: The Epistemological Principle for 
the Possibility of Morality
1. The objective validity of the facts of ethical experience cannot 
be maintained from the standpoint of sensuous beliefs. From this 
standpoint every phenomenon requires a substantive basis: sensa-
tion, reproduction, memory, instinct, and feeling are conditioned 
by the course of their correlated physiological processes. Were the 
higher and free processes of ethical life to be separated from ele-
mentary psychic processes, they would have to inhere in a higher 
mental substance, whose cooperation with the lower physical pro-
cesses would cancel the unity of consciousness. This psychic dual-
ism had to emerge as soon as the higher facts of the mental life were 
recognized. Plato, Aristotle, medieval philosophy, and theology had 
to fall into this contradiction.
As soon as one denies the higher ethical facts in favor of a log-
ically consistent scientific system, practical materialism arises. This 
insight, and the peculiar attempt to use the epistemological insights 
of the eighteenth century to solve the problem, may be regarded 
as the root of the Kantian system. However, Kant’s dissolution of 
substance, of the metaphysical unity of the soul, and of unities of a 
material nature made room for the ethical world, but did not pro-
vide sufficient foundations for its possibility
2. The reality or objective validity of what is given in inner experi-
ence consists in the fact that pleasure, pain, and passions constitute 
life itself. Their existence is identical with what is there for con-
sciousness. The existence of a feeling and its being felt are not two 
different things; they are life. Everything else can be understood as 
in its service, as decoration or background.
3. The reality of the external world and of objects consists in the 
fact that, as a volitional unity, I definitely find myself dependent on 
42
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
64 
I
something other or different from myself. This is the real concept of 
cause. I find myself compelled to affirm a manifold of forces.
4. Thus, there is an epistemological position from which to consider 
the volitional unities who become the object of morality through a 
system of ethical laws.
In the abstract philosophy of modern Europe, the first funda-
mental conception to develop was the mechanistic view that all 
physical phenomena— light, temperature, etc.— can be explained by 
deriving them from processes of motion. This led to the theoretical 
demand to derive biological processes from physico- chemical ones. 
But sensation, feeling, representation, [and] thought were separated 
from these processes and assumed to be part of an integral sphere of 
conscious processes. The latter processes were related to the former 
in some mode of correlation, correspondence, dependence, etc.
Questions concerning This Complex of Hypotheses:
1. We cannot know which of the physical phenomena goes the deep-
est. All physical processes are associated with processes of motion. 
But this [association] is still not an identity, which, like its atomistic 
foundation, is a sheer hypothesis. Theoretical constructs like mass, 
force, and atoms have a meaning for a system of thought only inso-
far as they make it possible to order experience. A reality for them 
outside of thought cannot be demonstrated.
Along with the system of properties, and the changes and cor-
relations that are given in sense, we are given inner states that 
involve a relation between outer and inner without our being 
able to give it a more [definitive] expression. Sensory organ and 
sense, brain and trace, retention, association, and reproduction go 
together like inner and outer.
 In this sphere there exists a necessary linkage to which the phys-
iological and psychological courses of events are subject— the latter 
is like the inside of the former.
2. The solution that Wilhelm Wundt suggests is thoroughly in ac-
cordance with the principles of transcendental idealism. On the one 
hand, as this psychologist explains, objective causality is a product 
of thought— more specifically, a product of the inherent logical cau-
sality of the mind. On the other hand, the postulated universal va-
lidity of objective causality generates the claim that our own think-
ing is to be seen as something necessarily established by objective 
43
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
65
causality. Nevertheless, the first perspective holds the advantage. As 
Ernst Mach puts it, if one were acquainted with the world only by 
way of the theater and then went behind the mechanistic fixtures 
of the stage, one might well believe that the real world needed a 
rigging- loft and that everything would be gained if only this were 
found. Similarly, the intellectual aids that we use to represent the 
world on the stage of thought cannot be regarded as the founda-
tions of the actual world!
3. Substance, cause, matter, and soul are mere metaphysical fic-
tions when considered as things. Any commerce between these enti-
ties would be a fiction of the second degree. The system of concepts 
in which this commerce is explicated is necessarily and inescapably 
contradictory. Indeed, this contradiction is not greater in the dual-
ism of Descartes— its inescapability does not emerge more sharply 
in occasionalism— than in Spinoza’s philosophy of identity, this so- 
called monism so often used in modern natural science. For the pre-
supposition of the equivalence of the mutual independence of these 
two orders is either to be given up in favor of one of them, or there 
is a metaphysical reality to be discovered behind both that projects 
this illusion. This contradicts, however, the thesis of the reality of 
psychical experiences. The monadology [of Leibniz] was thus an ad-
vancement to more consistent, deeper thinking. But correlation is a 
formula without intelligible content.
4. These contradictions disappear when one develops representa-
tions that correspond most closely with the nexus of life as such. 
In doing so, one must keep in mind how inadequately conceptual 
thought represents the nexus of life in order to be alert at every point 
for possible contradictions. All thinking about life- experiences can 
only attain a certain approximation within critically ascertainable 
bounds.
5. Let us start with the decisive point. Higher moral phenomena are 
given to us merely as processes on the foundation of a physically 
conditioned and determined animal vitality. As our thinking is linked 
with spatial imagery, it distinguishes a higher level, so to speak, from 
a lower level of psychic life. Corresponding to this spatial order or 
demarcation, there is a productivity in our life according to which 
higher processes can only proceed on the basis of lower processes, 
although these lower processes need never exist separately by them-
selves in the human psyche.
44
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
66 
I
6. Thus, it is not the case that there are specific delimited psychic 
occurrences that are linked with the physiological and then sponta-
neous, free occurrences floating above them. On the contrary, a free 
vital spontaneity is everywhere immanent in the necessary linkage 
between fixed, material processes and lawful elementary principles 
of the psyche.
Epistemological Determination Concerning the Legitimacy 
of the Three Methods5
1. If what is actual were given to us in perceptions, the last [socio- 
historical] method would be fundamental, needing only to be com-
plemented by the second method of inner experience. This is how 
Spencer, Wundt, and others have proceeded.
By this method, no one will be able to resolve the difficulties in-
volved in a teleological conception of developmental history if it is 
to deal adequately with ethical experiences.
If psychic processes are initially correlated with physiological 
processes, and if differentiation and increasing teleological adap-
tation occur in both spheres, then the question arises where the 
independent vital spontaneity of the moral processes begins. For the 
moral process has no correlate in brain states. Rather, these states 
are only its conditions.
Inner experience contains within it responsibility, duty, con-
sciousness of freedom, the forgetting of oneself as the hallmark of 
the ethical, the sacrifice of oneself as its most beautiful blossom. All 
this does not grow from the stem of our animal nature; it cannot 
be derived from transformations of our instinctive life and chang-
ing conditions. Thus, from this standpoint there arises an insoluble 
antinomy between the empirical facts of conscience and the hypo-
thetical theories of evolutionary thought.
The logical relationship is this: Inner experience cannot be ex-
plained by evolutionary theory. Inner experience can be contested 
and truncated by this theory but cannot be subsumed under it. Cog-
nitive thought which avails itself of the hypotheses of a correlation 
between the physical and the mental, and of an ascending develop-
ment in both realms, is unable to comprehend how the freedom of 
the moral could develop continuously and without a leap from the 
5 Three traditional methods of ethics were analyzed, starting at II, p. 38. The 
first was metaphysical, the second was based on inner experience, and the third was 
socio- historical.
45
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
67
territory of nature; nor can it comprehend how the moral can be 
correlated with the physical, or how it could extricate itself from 
this correlation.
From the standpoint of inner experience, however, there arise 
epistemological insights that show the impossibility of solving the 
foregoing problem and allow recognition of the correct relationship 
of the two methods to each other. Therefore, morality cannot avoid 
an epistemological foundation. Writings that proceed without such 
a foundation arrive at only a mixture of biological propositions and 
inner experiences, along with somewhat metaphysical conceptions 
in which contradictions can be smoothed away only by a kind of 
dilution or leveling.
2. Epistemology and the natural sciences supplement each other in 
a series of theses. There is, then, no doubt about them in modern 
thought. I merely assert them and will not quibble about their par-
ticular formulation[s]— there is no doubt about their main content. 
The most general proposition governing all cognition is that the 
entire world, lock, stock, and barrel, is an appearance for my con-
sciousness, a fact of consciousness.
This entails that [only] inner states are grasped as real and that 
all the constituents of the external world are phenomenal; [cogni-
tion of] the latter is practically useful, but [only] as a system of signs 
for what is independent of us.
If this implies a limitation on the real content of human cogni-
tion, there is, however, behind this limitation on the extension of 
human cognition another more important limitation that relates to 
the mode of our cognition. That first limitation has achieved general 
recognition since Locke and Kant. Everyone acknowledges this. On 
the basis of this, Comte— and in Germany, Helmholtz6 and others— 
have further constructed a cognitive system of the whole of nature, 
which throughout, in place of real reference points and connections, 
substitutes phenomena as reference points, and relations of equality 
and dependence as connections. And as the relationship of physical 
to psychic facts forms, so to speak, the center of this construction 
of what is actual, psychic facts are likewise placed in a correlative 
relationship with the physical. Moreover, since according to such a 
perspective everything is, as it were, embedded in a comprehensive 
6 Hermann Ludwig von Helmholtz (1821– 1894), German physiologist and 
physicist, who was a founding father of modern philosophy of science.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
68 
I
physical system, the correlative system of psychic facts appears al-
together appended and secondary. Thus, according to the law of the 
conservation of energy, the alteration that psychic processes bring 
about in the external world can be explained in terms of their ac-
companying physical antecedents without any engagement of psy-
chic life. In this way the physical nexus becomes a firm foundation, 
and the psychic nexus a world floating above it, and nothing is 
changed by the fact that the nature of the physical that is there for 
us in the signs of sensation and spatial relations, is unknown to us.
But when one also takes into consideration the intensive cog-
nitive limits that are immanent to our knowledge, only then is 
there the possibility of doing justice to the inner experiences of self- 
consciousness, responsibility, and of a free, vital spontaneity. The 
standpoint of an incomplete epistemic critique could never acknowl-
edge the presuppositions necessary to grasp these inner experiences. 
A representative of the idealism that results from this incomplete 
standpoint is Lange.7
The never- ending limits of cognition are conditioned by the fact 
that we not only directly experience the vital spontaneity of our 
own self as reality, but also that we use this pervasive vital sponta-
neity to unite the manifold givens of sense into objects and persons 
and finally explain and comprehend them.
Thus, we create around us a volitional actuality, a living exter-
nality that has an inner core that extends outwards and is filled with 
force. Everywhere relations of doing and undergoing, essentiality, 
meaning, and purpose.
We are, then, wholly incapable of looking behind us, so to speak, 
of going behind our own vital spontaneity to find a principle for the 
vital connection of our circumstances— i.e., to see into the nature of 
the transition of one circumstance to another.
At this point the insight first arises as to the immanent epistemic 
limitations of psychology and of the sciences based on it.
I experience at every moment how there originates from a feel-
ing an instinctlike striving to hold onto it. I experience how pain 
leads to withdrawal and then, further, to hatred. I can discern the 
regularity of transition in delineating the transition of one situation 
into another. I cannot, however, reach back behind these to my own 
vital spontaneity. The givenness of a feeling, or the quality of a rep-
resentation or of a volition cannot be derived from acts of feeling 
7 Friedrich Albert Lange (1828– 1875), German philosopher and political activ-
ist. Originator of neo- Kantianism and author of The History of Materialism.
46
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
69
or representing. To do so would destroy the inner experience itself, 
according to which representation, volition, and feeling always re-
main distinct. It would replace this inner experience with something 
emerging in the process of thinking and which is there, however, 
only by means of separation and combination.
I can no more posit the independence of individual sensations in 
thought than deny their unity; for this unity is the condition of my 
very apprehension. That a manifold is variegated but remains one, 
is there in lived experience; it can be acknowledged by thought, 
but not denied. Thus, the decisive contributions of psychology are 
merely descriptive. An explanative psychology is conceivable only 
within these inherent bounds. Concepts that are derived from the 
external world should not be uncritically employed to construct 
psychic relations. We know nothing of a mental substance. We are 
only acquainted with processes and their convergences. The most 
that can be achieved is not the ever- sought- after causal reduction of 
states to each other, but rather an understanding of their functional 
cooperation directed at establishing a temporary equilibrium in the 
life of feelings. In abstract terms, a teleological perspective is merely 
derived from this special nexus in the living being. It is then used to 
designate a similar relation of constituents or functions in a mate-
rial whole. Although we are certain of the existence of the reality of 
something independent of us in impulse, feeling, or will, the cogni-
tion of this external world is subjected to still other entirely differ-
ent immanent limits. On the other hand, cognition admittedly has 
quite different advantages and artifices of perception when it learns 
to use them.
That which stands against the will is given as cause or force. In-
sofar as this is independent from me but exhibits a regularity in 
its appearances, we can obtain a law that is a fact of the external 
world and just as certain as my own vital spontaneity. Further-
more, we can recognize or read off from the operation of forces 
in the external world that they involve a factor that strikes us as 
distanciating. This factor of distanciation, even if we assume the 
operation of remote forces, contributes to differences in their op-
eration. With forces that operate contiguously it is possible for A 
to affect B, while excluding the possibility that A can immediately 
influence some C that is separated from A through B. This rigidity 
in the effects of forces at a distance from each other distinguishes 
matter from our own inner life, for in this the influence of psychic 
forces is not bound by such a relationship. The vital spontaneity of 
psychic influences is unifying.
47
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
70 
I
That the outside appears to me as spatial and endowed with qual-
ities, is a consequence of the psycho- physical cognitive nature of my 
senses, which again are an ultimate for me. I cannot reach behind 
them; I cannot in actuality reduce color or sound to a movement as 
if it were the sole existential; I can only compare within a systemic 
context, distinguish stages and in this way elaborate a system. Con-
sequently, a consideration of the matter of nature leaves us unable to 
find unity, vital spontaneity, [and] coherence. All our thinking can 
only recognize coexistence, succession, identity, and uniformity; it 
can only combine, separate, compare, and relate. That means that 
thought has a tendency to mechanize.
TWO
The Will and Our Ethical Dispositions
Section 1: The Basic Organization  
of the Living Being
The task of ethics is to gain a firm footing in the stream of develop-
ment, to take a stand amid the alterations of living beings in their 
ascending line where everything appears relative and variable. If 
ethics is to do this in a universally valid way, how could it not take 
as its starting point the nature of psychic life, the processes of the 
will in the human being!
To react to impressions in order to restore equilibrium— that is 
the schema of living beings.
The drives inherent in our animal organization are excited by 
external stimuli and become operative; they exert a purposive in-
fluence on the external world by means of reflex mechanisms and 
thereby establish an adaptation between it and the individual.
This nexus of processes takes on a teleological character. The 
basic concept of the organic establishes itself at this point. When ac-
tivated by a stimulus, a drive operates in accordance with the needs 
of the system of animal functions to which it is linked.
The purposiveness in the linkage of these psychic representations 
increases with the number of links in the chain. Ever more inter-
mediate links insert themselves between the stimulus effect and the 
activation of drives. The simplest connection is observable in lower 
48
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
71
animal life: Each momentary stimulation evokes a change in the in-
ner condition of lower animals that leads to a movement of adapta-
tion or rejection. Stimulus, altered state, and instinctive movement 
are always linked in this uniform way.
When separate organs appear, they become bearers of isolated 
psychic processes. Then there originates in this organic matter, with 
the return of the same stimulus, an inner condition that includes 
consciousness of the familiar or habitual: recognition. Separate 
sensory organs result in special sensory qualities. Memory and 
imaginary representations develop, and instinctive life then also 
differentiates itself— corresponding to the separation of organic 
systems there emerges a drive for nourishment, a drive for move-
ment, a drive for security, etc. Reflex mechanisms form and sep-
arate from each other, [resulting in] an ever- advancing process of 
differentiation and refinement amongst the separate organs and 
functions.
Thus, [the organism’s] impressions come to correspond ever more 
to the variegated milieu. Instincts or drives form a system that ac-
companies, carries, and supports the animal functions. The play of 
feelings expresses the growing relations of instinctive states to the 
environment. Psychic formations such as sensations, perceptions, 
representations, thoughts, feelings, moods, affects, drives, volitions 
are differentiated, and the reactions of such an organism for the 
purpose of adapting to the external world mesh together into a man-
ifold of movements, which are in large part supported by a reflex 
mechanism.
Section 2: Purposiveness in the Basic Plan  
of the Living Being
One could conceive of organisms in which adaptation to the ex-
ternal world was constantly maintained by intellectual processes. 
Such organisms would have to distinguish harmful and useful nour-
ishment, good and bad air, by way of intellectual operations. The 
skill of psychic creatures is to do this through instinct and the feel-
ing connected with it— to be sure in an abbreviated and disjointed 
fashion, but nevertheless in ample measure. There is no need for 
quasi- omniscience by which the intellect would provide for the 
affairs of animate beings. Instinct and feeling teach them to seek 
nourishment, to distinguish useful from harmful nourishment, drive 
them to reproduce, support natural selection, teach them to defend 
themselves, to hide.
49
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
72 
I
This occurs by way of a regular connection of a pleasurable feel-
ing with a relationship of usefulness between a living being and its 
environment, a connection of pleasurable feeling and the activation 
of an instinctive drive. If, on the contrary, there existed a regular 
connection between such a relationship and an unpleasant feeling, 
we could not live one day.
This simple stratagem of nature makes possible preservation, 
propagation, and improvement within the living being.
But when sensations are related in perception and thought, our 
grasp of the external world becomes more fundamental. Similarly, 
when feelings and instincts are integrated, our assessments of value 
rise above the momentary and the particular. As a result, the ad-
aptation of individual living beings to their environment becomes 
ever more complete, and with that our psychic purposiveness in-
creases. This is always the basic structure of all life even in the high-
est forms of historical life. All mysteries about historical existence 
and its achievements can be solved only on the basis of a biological 
foundation of psychic being.
Section 3: The Centrality of Instinctive  
and Affective Life
Thus what is so manifest, and often so dreadful, in the life of an-
imals remains the case for human existence. A human being is a 
bundle of drives. On one side, there are sensory stimuli and rep-
resentations; on the other side, there are movements. They are the 
tentacles, as it were, by means of which this system of drives sucks 
in impressions, [and] to which it reacts [by] grasping, appropriating 
or warding off what is outside. Never has human nature been more 
seriously misjudged than by those who espouse an aesthetics of the 
beautiful soul or an intellectualistic perspective. When the French 
Revolution conceived of man as a rational being to be treated as 
such, when the Enlightenment grounded the progress of the hu-
man race on scientific cognition, when France unleashed powers, 
set up humane goals and intended to lead humanity toward them 
through the working together of all classes— they completely mis-
understood that these bundles of drives can at any time be held 
together only by a volitional force. History can be understood only 
when the centrality of the powerful volitional life of humanity is 
investigated. The Stoics of late antiquity, Neoplatonism, and Chris-
tianity just offered more mature, inwardly directed versions of this 
ancient insight.
50
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
73
Section 4: The Inner Relatedness of Instinct, 
Feeling, and Volition
1. In the description of the forms of mental life there is a separa-
tion between feeling, instinct, and volition, just as there is between 
representation and feeling. These expressions designate partial con-
tents of psychic processes. As a partial content, a representation has 
no actual existence by itself. The act of representing always contains 
instinct and feeling within itself: a process characteristic of the self.
2. Instinct and feeling, however, cannot be separated from each 
other within the concrete biological sciences. Here they appear as 
different forms through which the same process flows. This pro-
cess consists in a reaction of the system of instinctive drives to an 
impression. Here it is unimportant whether feeling or instinct is 
the first form of this reaction. In whatever way this reaction comes 
about, it can appear in the form of feeling, in the form of instinct, or 
in the form of volition.
Section 5: The Spheres of Instinct and Feeling
1. Each actual state of feeling or instinct is composed of a plurality 
of simple ways of reacting. A melody from Don Giovanni contains 
a felt tonality, a feeling of harmony, rhythm, and a heroic affect.
2. These modes of reaction are indeterminate as to their number, but 
they can, like the sensations, be arranged into spheres. I call them 
spheres of feeling and instinct. One such instinctive sphere is that 
which time and again supports the process of seeking nourishment.
3. Together these [spheres] form the hidden side of the processes, 
within the subject, whose external sensible effects are found in 
perception, representation, imagery, and processes of motion. I get 
shoved while walking in the street. The external side of the process 
is a sequence of images, and their relations in thought; the internal 
side involves pain, anger, the striving to step aside, and so on.
4. There are three distinguishable forms of willing, conditioned 
by the kind of connection they have with other processes. Willing 
can involve the interest and attentiveness [of apperception], or for-
mative imaginative activity, or [instinctive] volitional drives. They 
differ and cannot be reduced to each other, yet they are all forms 
of inner action guided by feeling. These three forms of willing 
51
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
74 
I
compose the inner core of human life like cells in a plant. Wundt 
wants to attribute everything to apperception, others to instinct. 
Overlooked is the formative activity of the imagination, which also 
involves a kind of volition. There are various forms of volition 
that converge on each other. Whether one should designate them 
as part of the will leads to verbal disputes. They evidently manifest 
an affinity, and yet at the same time each has a different psychic 
localization.
5. The way in which these individual actions are connected with 
each other into a unity of action in self- consciousness is quite dif-
ferent from the connections that we hypothetically assume to ex-
ist among the ultimate elements of a natural whole, or organism. 
Representations can, at any moment, enter into relations to each 
other quite independently of their momentary positions relative to 
each other in consciousness. Juxtaposition in space, after all, is in 
the first instance just the figurative expression for saying that cor-
responding distances modify effects. Distance is, then, the correlate 
for the power of modifying effects. Thus, there exists in the external 
world a network of fixed elements, of modification of forces, which 
elements serve as the constant conditions of the most general ways 
that unalterable forces operate. They provide the basis for the play 
of specific forces. These rigid conditions of operation do not occur 
in psychic life.
Here, consequently, there is no juxtaposition of specific psychic 
elements. With this goes the following: The unity of natural forces 
lies in lawful cooperation. Sensations, drives, and feelings cooperate 
differently. Feelings can under certain conditions merge completely, 
impulses can form an overall power; etc.
Thus, we find a unity of desires, feelings, and their gradual merging. 
We can allow for a concurrence among past and future satisfactions.
Section 6: The Primary Sphere of Instincts  
and Feelings— Instinctive Mechanisms and  
the Desires, Passions, and Affective States  
They Produce
A reflex mechanism consists in a coordination of movements, aroused 
by a stimulus that can be accompanied by sensory content. Although 
it does not stem from our drives, it can be purposive within a limited 
scope. An example is sneezing and coughing.
52
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
75
When the aggregate of sensations excited by a stimulus, and the 
feelings connected with them, arouse an impulse— i.e., a tension 
manifested in our consciousness that strives for the activation of a 
movement by a meditating reflex mechanism— then we designate 
this process as instinctive and the psychological arrangement that it 
makes possible as an instinctive mechanism.
One can say that the most powerful forces of the moral world are 
hunger, love, and war. The physiological processes to which main-
tenance of the individual and of the species are tied contain a mani-
fold of reflex mechanisms; however, some of the most important of 
these are quite removed from the will, i.e., merely automatic. Thus 
the reflex mechanisms of the respiratory process and the circulation 
of blood maintained by cardiac movement operate in short, regular 
intervals without the assistance of the will, and only pathological 
disturbances are accompanied by stronger feelings.
From these, we differentiate those reflex mechanisms that are 
evoked by temporary stimuli and can be suppressed by the will. That 
the will can suppress them is an element of their purposiveness. 
Such mechanisms are coughing, sneezing, crying, and laughing.
They again differ from drives and instinctive mechanisms.
The Drive for Sustenance
The consumption of food, which requires a selection and a tak-
ing possession occurs by means of the most powerful, elemental 
drive that serves the maintenance of the body. Here we move from 
hunger and thirst, as the most severe feeling of displeasure, to an 
irresistible drive that demands satisfaction, a most intense enjoy-
ment in the satisfaction itself, and then the typical feeling of being 
satiated. Nature has imposed a severe penalty on the harmful ab-
stinence from nourishment and a premium on the correct choice 
of nourishment. Thus, she has forced animals and humans even 
under ever so difficult circumstances to seek nutritive material and 
to take possession of it. We also see the life of lower animal forms, 
then that of the beast of prey and herbivorous creatures, which are 
quite predominantly occupied with relieving this drive in its vari-
ous phases. Craving, seizing the prey, and the calm of satiation fill 
the day of the beast of prey. The life of the newborn is, according to 
the course of this drive, divided into unrest, crying, consumption of 
food, the calm of satiation, and sleep. Also, in the life of primitive 
peoples the phases of this instinctive organ take up the broadest 
space.
53
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
76 
I
The Sex Drive and Love of Children
No less impetuous is the drive that emerges to serve the mainte-
nance of the species. Here, too, in pleasure, in the gratification of 
urgent cravings, nature has put a premium on that which, next to 
the maintenance of the individual, is most important.
According to G. W. Schneider,1 the drive to procreate is con-
nected with the love of descendants. We can already observe care 
for the young in spiders and insects. In animals it is partially as-
sociated with periods. In all vertebrates, selective mating proceeds 
in the same way: searching for and following a partner, courting 
through affectionate play, jealousy about rivals, fighting and ex-
pelling them. We find all of this already in marine life and more 
generally in mammals, just as in popular novels about human life. 
Just like humans, birds court by means of song. They also woo 
through playful movements, aerial gyrations, dances, fluttering 
around. Birds and mammals give themselves airs in front of the 
females, show off and fight with rivals. In humans, this foundation 
is linked with many higher feelings: complete partnership for life, 
inviolability of fidelity, historical feelings.
Protective and Defensive Impulses
Just as elementary and powerful are those drives or impulses that 
are connected with reflex mechanisms to answer hostile attacks 
from without by defensive movements or by escaping to find ref-
uge and safety. These defensive and protective mechanisms likewise 
have a very elementary power that makes them irresistible; they are 
likewise the seat of strong affects such as anger, hate, fright, con-
sternation, and aggression— then back to repose in safety. Defensive 
action follows involuntarily upon an attack. One perceives in ani-
mals that instantaneously snap back, and in human movements of 
pushing away, how involuntary the connection is between action 
and the reaction and how difficult it is to control.
Simple defensive and protective impulses determined by stimuli 
are already seen in their typical configurations in lower animals. The 
contractive impulse of lower animals is such an elementary form. 
1 Georg Wilhelm Schneider, Der Tierische Wille (Leipzig, 1880), 150ff. In the 
preface to the German edition of Dilthey’s System of Ethics, the editor notes that 
Schneider’s book, along with that by Horwicz, is the main support for Dilthey’s 
central thesis that utilitarianism is inconsistent with “modern science.”
54
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
77
When they are touched, mussels close their shells, worms escape into 
the sand, snails into their casings. Another impulse that responds 
to hostile encroachment is the defensive movement. Some animals 
squirt out fluids of a repulsive sort, which manifests itself as swearing 
in many humans, while other animals defend themselves with jaws, 
with dorsal fins, with claws or hoofs. Small animals coil together 
and play dead, while others scare their enemies with loud noises, by 
sudden alterations of their bodily form, [or] threats with weapons. 
We find simple defensive forms displayed in the drives, affects, and 
movements of animals, which we meet again in human society.
No doubt the higher animals exhibit more complicated forms 
of protection and defense; here too the dual form of escape and 
warding off appear everywhere in resisting an attack according to 
the temper and means of the creature. Schneider narrates how once 
at a Naples aquarium a man- eating shark was put in a tank with 
a large number of triggerfish, which optically vanished like light-
ning upon first being perceived by their already dying foe. As they 
could not flee, they pressed themselves against the rocks in such a 
way as to become difficult to spot. One sees the snipe lower itself 
deftly in its hiding place; catlike predators also crouch like birds; 
it is the same movement that humans involuntarily make against 
certain forms of attack. Other animals protect themselves by care-
fully fabricated coverings, and then those more complex instincts 
emerge that lead upward from the worm burying itself in the sand 
to villages of termites.
Defensive movements stand in contrast to the above. They give 
rise in the animal world to the emotions of courage, of anger, of 
hate. We often see very courageous male birds, easily excited to 
anger and aggression, defend themselves against even quite superior 
enemies! The bear and the gorilla sometimes snatch weapons from 
humans, smash them and chew them to pieces. The cunning affects 
involved in repelling an enemy in the higher animal world, and then 
in the human world makes itself particularly conspicuous. Birds 
ruffle their feathers; the cobra spreads out the skin on each side of 
its throat into a large plate, the so- called shield. Other animals arch 
their back or bristle, bare their teeth, or break out into howling.
All these forms of defense recur as impulsive movements within 
the human world and develop [from sudden affects] into conscious, 
long- lived emotions. Similarly, weaker human beings crouch, escape, 
and hide; the more courageous defend themselves— both classes try 
threats. In response to attacks on them many humans at first inflate 
themselves; if the attacks become more violent, then. . . . Impulsive 
55
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
78 
I
threats are implicit in raising one’s voice, in clenching one’s fists, 
and in exposing one’s teeth.
Transformation into Affects and Passions
The reaction against a disturbing encroachment transforms itself, 
upon repetition and increasing clarity as to the cause, into the affect 
of revenge. When this enters into a stronger connection with the 
will, hate results as an enduring passion. Hatred has quite diverse 
sources. We can hate someone because he witnessed a dishonest act 
of ours, i.e., from a sense of shame. Likewise, we hate someone who 
expects a sacrifice from us which we do not want to make. Even here 
a disturbing encroachment presents itself to us. Other forms are 
religious hatred and hatred of foreigners. It can likewise arise from 
comparative feelings.
Hate is a derivative passion. It disappears with the affect that was 
its source. Hate always feeds on the originating feeling that carries 
it. In contrast, love adapts gracefully and tenderly to the contents 
of life’s relationships. Hate remains obsessed with its originating 
feeling.
Vengeance belongs to the natural ethos of primitive peoples: the 
feeling of revenge, anger, resentment, punitive action, reparation, a 
crude insult. One displaced lover attacks the other. The duel is civi-
lized vengeance. In life, or when represented in drama or novels, sym-
pathy is turned toward the object of vengeance. To bear a grudge 
is not regarded as a virtue. In short, vengeance is considered as 
natural in modern civilization, but ineffective. And if vengeance be-
comes a lasting feeling, it is considered to be of inferior worth. On 
the other hand, we see a new demand for reconciliation.
Fright is correctly depicted by Bain2 as a primary affect. A shock 
from an external attack is discharged in a reflexive process. It is 
consequently an especially remarkable form of defensive and pro-
tective effort against attacks, viz., against sudden and very strong 
ones. Fright has its counterpart in movement. It is an instrument in 
the art of raw effects. King Lear, the witch scene of Macbeth, and 
Weber’s Der Freischütz inspire fright even when this is diminished 
by being spatially remote and by our consciousness of stage illusion.
Albrecht Dürer’s Knight, Death and the Devil embodies the com-
posure of a great soul even in a state of fright.
2 Alexander Bain (1818– 1903): Scottish philosopher and psychologist.
56
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
79
The Impulse to Move and the Need for Rest
Muscular states constantly release impulses that stand in regular 
relations to the mechanisms of movement. The impulse to move 
is operative in all the muscles that we can control. They condition 
the bodily feeling of life at any given moment. They mark off, so to 
speak, the muscular system from the external world. How power-
ful they are is shown in the pain and unrest of confined predatory 
animals or in imprisoned human beings. We do not put ourselves in 
motion in order to achieve a goal; movement is our nature.
The feelings of movement, the restlessness of organic life, receive 
an intensification through changes in the states of the organs. They 
release stimuli, which then produce impulses.
The need for freedom involves the spiritualization of these im-
pulses. These impulses provide the sensory background for this need, 
since from a sensory standpoint, it requires the absence of any re-
striction on movement.
 The impulse to move is followed, in rhythmic alteration, by the 
demand for rest. This sensory feeling, too, is in the first instance 
physiologically grounded on the state of our muscles and the con-
nected nerves. But then it becomes the basis of mental states, of rest, 
leisure, deep contentment, in which this form of feeling and motivation 
enters into connections with those of other classes.
Section 7: The Processes Involved  
in the Transformation of Drives into  
Desires and Passions.
The Place That These Affects, Desires, and  
Passions Have in Our Bio- Social Economy.
1. When a drive establishes itself, its effects persist even in the trans-
formations that it undergoes. And indeed, our drives continue to 
operate in transformations in which only analysis can recognize 
them. Example: the love of money can become an all- controlling pas-
sion. Its driving force consists, however, in the fact that it represents 
pleasures which stand in relation to the instincts, and even more in 
the fact that money contains a kind of guarantee for the drive of 
self- protection and provides a measure of security for the feeling of 
freedom connected to the impulse for mobility.
2. Our drives appear (as Schneider first showed) in four forms, 
which develop separately according to psychological laws. We can 
57
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
80 
I
distinguish sensory, perceptual, representational, and intellectual 
drives. Each of them involves a transformation of the instinctive 
life that is both elementary and pervasive. The elementary [or in-
stinctive drives] are refined to become better suited for integration 
into the household of moral life. [Yet] all elementary drives persist, 
in whatever strength, by means of their transformation into desires 
[and] passions within the economy of the individual and of society. 
We cannot get rid of our drives. They can be transformed, limited 
in their effect, but not eradicated. They are the indestructible source 
of all volitional processes.
Our drives assert themselves within the strictures of the tendency 
to achieve satisfaction of these desires with the least possible fric-
tion to disturb their effect. For such friction results in a dimi-
nution of the self- preservation and power that we strive for. The 
upshot of this way of satisfying drives, then, is that hatred [and] 
conflict are avoided, while cooperation for expediency is sought. 
Thus, one eliminates the hatred from vengeance, and retains only a 
purposive retaliation.
3. On the other hand, the cultivation of purposiveness in this pro-
cess is based on a purposive coordination of movements by which 
a drive is actualized. This coordination is hereditarily transmitted 
(cats, hounds, hunters, and homebodies). Such development is an 
important component of social progress. The burden of conscious-
ness is diminished as we use more and more of our drives as slaves. 
Finally, coordination is completed through the cooperation of many 
persons. This will produce an ethos of justice, political institutions, 
and a division of labor. 
Sensory Feelings That Are Independent of Drives
1. To the extent that drives are powerful, their natural force flows 
incessantly from the inner core of our animal- human nature just as 
a mountain stream makes its way. The motivational mechanisms in 
the animal world and primitive cultures are subject to periodic al-
teration. It indicates a higher level of culture when their appearance 
requires stimuli from determinate forces in the external world. Here 
we can distinguish feelings and motivating impulses in which the 
nature of the stimuli prevails, and accordingly feelings and drives 
manifest themselves less energetically and merge with our repre-
sentational life. Here, then, the power of the milieu exceeds that 
of the living being. The drives and passions, of course, always seek 
58
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
81
an outlet, but then the living being finds itself merely conditioned 
from the outside. And to the extent that the intellect becomes stron-
ger and the will freer, our dependence is borne more heavily, fear 
and hope take over, and chance occurrences become a torment to 
humanity.
2. Thus, in addition to the drives and their system, there emerges a 
system of objective causes of feelings in the external world and the 
regular responses of our feelings toward this system.
3. And here there emerges still more clearly a fact of volitional life 
that accompanies all volitional phenomena. This fact points to the 
retroactive effect of drives upon these [phenomena]. Felt and impul-
sive volitions evoke a concentration, an increased stirring of con-
sciousness, which is comparable to a strong and expanding wave. 
This stirring of volitional consciousness is matched by the appear-
ance of elementary processes linking the conceptual representations 
involved. Thus an enhanced radiance surrounds the passions.
Section 8: Negative, Restrictive,  
and Formative Ethics
1. All of these drives have an outer side, according to which they 
are exhibited to sensory perception as bodily organs, functions, [and] 
processes. In them the necessity of external nature governs. Being 
hungry, the drive to eat originating in the unconscious, is psychic 
and yet at the same time a natural process. I call this mental state 
of affairs “psychic animality.”
2. Once these drives have been allowed to mature we can begin to 
reject and combat them by exerting pressure from without. A mo-
rality that does this we call restrictive. But insofar as [a morality] 
completely rejects them and attempts to nullify psychic animality al-
together, we call it negative. The morality of the Stoics and Kant was 
restrictive. The morality of the Neoplatonists, Christian communi-
ties, the Buddhists, and Schopenhauer is negative. Both standpoints 
involve the suppression of nature and strife, and so there arises a 
dualism in the will between high animality and a spiritualistic will.
3. The principle of the cultivation of instinctive life is abstractly 
articulated in Schleiermacher’s formative ethics. It shapes the drives. 
That it involves a formative cultivation marks a great advance, but 
59
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
82 
I
a concrete foundation is lacking. This [foundation] lies in the recog-
nition and utilization of psycho- physical relationships. The means 
of cultivating psychic animality into a joyful form of life in har-
mony with the higher life is the diet— understanding this word in 
its broadest sense. The beautiful lifestyle of the Greek ethos in its 
prime was founded on dieting. Plato already complains about its 
dissolution through luxury. Moderation and the correct control of 
nutrition, the intensification of bodily exercise and activities, are the 
true means of maintaining a joyful life in a healthy body, and the 
sex drive in its natural, moderate form.
Section 9: Feelings Conditioned  
by Our Own Will and the Motivating  
Impulses That Stem from Them.
We enter a territory that is difficult to deal with, and until now 
unexplored. But it contains the first mode of ethical power we aim 
to disclose.
Indeed, we grasp here the core of an ethics of resolve. The British 
of the eighteenth century did not define this core correctly because 
their psychological analysis was incomplete. The judgment of the 
spectator is, to be sure, conditioned by sympathy, but this judg-
ment has its primary foundation in those feelings that derive from 
our volitional life. Consequently, judgment based on sympathy is 
only secondary. On the other hand, Aristotle’s eudaemonia, the con-
sciousness of the internally grounded strength of character in the 
Stoics, the moral principle of Kantian ethics are formulae for the 
volitional core. But because their psychological understanding was 
insufficient, their principles appear one- sided and isolated. Kant’s 
sense of duty is a merely formal conception.
Courage, strength of character, perseverance, firmness, consis-
tency, loyalty, [and] joyful energy in work, are the felt manifesta-
tions of these volitions that express the joy of the will in itself, a 
feeling accompanying the volitions that arise from our inner na-
ture. These states of feeling are thus independent from the envi-
ronment and the conditions of life. If we succeed in strengthening 
their power, then the decision over happiness and unhappiness falls 
to our own person, and indeed in the very disposition of our will. 
Thus the heroic feeling of life is grounded in these states of mind 
and shapes itself on the basis of their relations.
The heroic will is the ideal of all nations in the epoch of their 
youth, resolve is the main component of their ethical ideal in the 
60
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
83
time of their adulthood, and only aging peoples develop a contem-
plative ideal of life.
A broader perspective opens up with the thesis that a strong hu-
man being inclines toward converting a surplus of power into an 
active, benevolent effect. A cheerful self- esteem finds itself stirred 
sympathetically and wants to embrace the whole world. Weakness, 
by contrast, makes [one] tepid and gloomy, full of aversion. There is 
also a connection between loyalty and a sense of obligation.
That is the leverage that we are looking for. We want to grasp the 
psychological core of the original content of virtue. 
I. The simplest feeling of this type is the joyful consciousness of 
power and the intensification of the feeling of life that is connected 
with it. We find its counterpart in a shared joy when observing oth-
ers exert power. Volitional energy pleases, and weakness displeases.
1. The exertion of effort through which an impulse executes a 
movement and [overcomes] resistance to it is the initial measure 
in the sensory sphere of the joyful consciousness that accompanies 
action, and the pleasure that it gives a spectator. Here the amount 
of effort that was expended by the will is measured by how an exe-
cuted movement overcomes obstacles.
A child that passively allows itself to be struck by another who 
is not stronger experiences shame. A man, who upon being struck 
has allowed no defensive action to follow can never forgive him-
self for that, regardless of the power of the adversary. Here we see 
the consciousness of weakness at work. It seems to affect us only 
when no spectator is on hand. When spectators are watching, the 
feeling is linked with how the action is reflected in the judgment 
of the audience, and how this is in turn reflected in the actor. This 
reflex is reinforced by the judgmental manifestations of laughing, 
shrugging, etc. But even when the affected person is alone, there 
are, so to speak, spectators around, viz., it is imagined how they 
would judge.
At this point moral and aesthetic feelings converge. The enjoy-
ment of power that is manifested when movements are speeded up, 
made more purposive and elastic— the satisfaction taken in a steady 
stride, in the leap of the lion, in physical male energy— is condi-
tioned by the relation of impulse, expended effort, [and] muscular 
movement. And from there comes the elation generated by rolling 
thunder, [or] the rising tide of the sea. At this primitive level moral 
and aesthetic feelings are not separate.
61
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
84 
I
2. A higher level of culture can be assigned to the feeling of power 
[that accompanies] the will when directed toward spiritual goals.
The cunning of the Odyssey’s hero, his crafty mental energy, 
could not be held up as an ideal in a still heroic epoch, if this 
mental feeling of power had not been coupled with superior phys-
ical power and physical fortitude. Also, in the ideal of epic Nordic 
poetry, the craftiness of seafaring men is constantly coupled with 
their power.
It must also be conceded that the energy of a formative, shap-
ing power is not as much accompanied by the joy of life as that 
of the impulse involved in bodily movements, and the energy of 
effort expended in attending to spiritual subject matters is again 
accompanied by a lesser degree of the enjoyment of life, and in the 
corresponding joy of spectators. The expenditure of effort recedes 
more and more into invisibility. The fortitude to accept suffering is, 
from an ethical standpoint, just as invisible as it is superior in mag-
nitude to that of impulsive deeds, but it lacks the heroic glow that 
surrounds an active folk hero. This fortitude becomes, so to speak, 
metaphysical— receding into mystery, silence, invisibility, inaudibil-
ity, intimacy.
II. Next to the joyful consciousness of power as an essential fea-
ture of a will that possesses a surplus of will power, reaching its 
goal whatever the perils, we find courage, and its intensification in 
boldness.
The link between willpower and courage can be substantiated by 
many facts. First of all, a surplus of power is generally conducive to 
courage. To have heart, be bold- hearted, take heart, etc. points to 
this physiological basis. A slender body can produce a surplus of 
disposable energy; a giant can have a deficiency of physical power. 
That courage is conditioned by physical circumstances is easiest 
to see in the fact that even the coward can get up his courage with 
a drink— Dutch courage. Even food has an effect. But more accu-
rately, it has to do with the available, surplus energy of the will. This 
can admittedly have physical conditions, but we have no reason to 
view it as merely a correlate of physical functions. A powerful body 
structure is unable to signal the kind of courage that exceeds phys-
ical superiority. Indeed, one observes that powerful bodies [often] 
exhibit a lack of courage precisely when faced with suffering.
Courage is manifested in quick and yet measured movements 
and in firm facial expressions. When in bed, human beings find 
themselves, so to speak, out of action and when disposable will 
62
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
85
power is reduced by fatigue, even the courageous are befallen by 
heavy thoughts.
The essential characteristic of courage lies precisely in the joy-
fulness and the elevated and resolved attitude with which a person 
confronts danger. King William III of England was said to be seri-
ous and self- absorbed on the whole, but cheerful precisely when in 
danger.
This joyous feeling is connected with a kind of oversight of dan-
ger or certain suffering— arising from a quite original quality of the 
will with regard to dangers or certain misfortunes that cannot be 
further explained. Just as there are people who sense danger every-
where, not through an attribute of the intellect but of temperament, 
who are always weighed down by misfortune, so there are others 
who shrug all of that off. This is simply an original quality of the 
will and does not result merely from a surplus of power.
An increase in courage with respect to dangers (not to certain 
misfortune) is boldness. The courageous meet danger firmly; those 
who are bold seek it out.
3. Energy, Diligence, Work— The Active  
Force Constantly Applied to Work
Work is the exertion of force that is devoted to some endeavor. This 
exertion is an essential feature or form of willing and is in agree-
ment with courage in the concentration on a goal, in the expendi-
ture of power, [and] in associated sacrifices.
The distinction is that the nature and the conditions of life de-
mand a great, heroic exertion of will in the case of courage, but a 
steady and unremitting exertion and resolve of will in the case of 
work. In both cases, the volitional exertion is connected with a 
strengthening of the feeling of life.
Tetens3 assumes that this exertion of will has the consequence 
of increasing psychic power. This appears to agree with experience. 
One can assume that from the reservoir of pent up bodily powers, or 
that of psychological pent up (unconscious) powers, such a trans-
action takes place, or that with a correlative bodily process such 
an increment in psychic power occurs. Such a view would have to 
assume, then, an increase of differentiated powers in the psychic 
3 Johannes Nikolaus Tetens (1736– 1807), German philosopher, who advocated 
the empirical analysis of the mind through self- observation.
63
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
86 
I
realm. The most natural view would [postulate] a certain release 
of the inner tension of psychic forces contained in organic nature, 
which one could also label the unconscious. This panpsychism or 
pantheism, as Fechner conceives it,4 may correspond quite well with 
the facts. If this panpsychism can be upheld, then the principle of 
evolution, the development of nature, would fall squarely on the 
psychological inner side.
4. Consistency, Perseverance,  
and the Planlike Unity of Volitions
The power of volition and of feeling results in a lasting and con-
tinued effect. Thus, in the back and forth of willing and feeling we 
witness the energy of [these processes].
It is sublime to see William of Orange, through many years 
calmly and without any outward indication, preparing the revolt of 
the Netherlands. It is sublime to see Kant, from the 1760s quietly 
preparing for the Critique of Pure Reason of 1781. It is foolish when 
one mourns for a dead person, but soon cannot do without amuse-
ments and remain in solitude.
This effect [of perseverance] is enhanced by a volitional unifor-
mity which is a correlative basic condition for the enhancement of 
the will. This uniformity is always produced only from a variegated 
life of drives. The more powerful these drives, the greater the expen-
diture of will needed for this uniformity. But the acquired cohesion 
of volitional acts will be the richer for it. The possibility of this 
production of uniformity lies, however, in the characteristics of con-
sciousness that make self- consciousness possible. Thus, consistency, 
loyalty, and plan- based unity are an accomplishment of the exertion 
of power under conditions that reach down into the deepest meta-
physical nature of human volitions. Here too an essential feature of 
the will is present that coheres with this metaphysical nature, which 
is experienced as a joyous enhancement of the person and appreci-
ated as valuable in others.
4 Gustav Theodor Fechner (1801– 1887), founder of psychophysics, and expo-
nent of the view that all of nature is ultimately spiritual. Initially a professor of phys-
ics in Leipzig during the 1830s, Fechner wrote a book on the “mental life of plants” 
in 1848.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
87
5. The Devotion of the Will to Emergent 
Purposes That Exceed Our Own Life
There arises in the will a further basic, seemingly archetypal, phe-
nomenon. Psychic life appears expanded and intensified in relation 
to the size and powerfulness of the images it assimilates and of the 
concepts, the value, and the purposes to which it is devoted.
This [devotion] is a characteristic without which there would 
be no greatness and no sublimity at all in the human world. One 
cannot derive these effects on the soul from greatness as such, but 
rather must derive them from the capacity to be aroused by great-
ness [and] sublimity. On this, then, rests the devotion of the will 
to great, supra- individual purposes of life, cultural systems, and 
associations.
Section 10: The Moral Consciousness of One’s 
Own Volitional Disposition and Actions 
Inherent in These Archetypal Phenomena  
of Moral Life
1. Volition proceeds in three stages when it runs its full and normal 
course, so to speak. Our drives, and those feelings that are con-
ditioned by the external world and its inherent objective causes, 
produce a system of needs that is preserved in the forms of feeling, 
passion, affect, and volition. These evoke an exertion of the will 
that produces achievements in one form or another, which [in turn] 
serve the drives, impulses, and needs of human nature in its rela-
tion to the objective causes. And from these activities arise multiple 
forms of satisfaction, contentment, enjoyment, and leisure.
2. The nexus of drives and desires is necessary and, so to speak, 
the mechanical and merely inner side of animality. All socially 
formative activity connected with the consciousness of freedom 
involves the exertion of the will in its various forms.
3. This exertion of will is, on the one hand, accompanied by in-
herently unpleasant feelings, but on the other hand, when a suf-
ficient supply of will power is available, this exertion is in all 
cases— as an exercise of courage, as work, as plan- based activity— 
accompanied by a heightened state of feeling: It provides a kind 
of fulfillment.
64
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
88 
I
4. And indeed this exertion of will is accompanied by a conscious-
ness of freedom, causing a growth of volitional energy—and thus 
it enters into a metaphysical nexus inscrutable to us.
Section 11: Affective Judgments about  
the Actions of Others and the Principle  
for the Evaluative Determinations That  
Inhere in These Archetypal Phenomena
The process in which the experience of self- worth of a disposition 
of will and the affective judgment about the worth of others are 
linked is amenable to several psychological interpretations. One can 
derive the ethical judgment as reflecting the experience of the voli-
tional disposition having its own worth; or one can view both kinds 
of feeling as equally original; or one can derive the consciousness 
of self- worth as reflecting the evaluation of others (Hume); or one 
can conceive of both kinds of evaluative feeling as originating from 
the success and usefulness of an inherent disposition by means of 
an inference. The latter conception is definitely shown to be erro-
neous by the analysis of the processes just considered. We can now 
begin to refute utilitarianism by taking note of certain psychic facts. 
The joyful expansion of the self that accompanies the activation of 
energy, of courage, and the consequent validation of conviction— is 
a primary lived experience from which the value- judgment about 
such features of the will arises. Those who reduce the feeling of the 
value of courage or strength of character to their utility will never 
have had any aspect of the heroic feeling of life pulsate within them.
However, we have no way of deciding whether the affective judg-
ment about others is a primary process or derivative.
In any case, there is a constituent of consciousness that contains a 
sense of harmony or kinship and connects the experience of self- worth 
with the affective judgment about the volitional disposition of others. 
The solidarity of all human beings, the knowledge of it given in feel-
ing, forms its basis. This conscious solidarity extends to all creatures:
In certain circumstances, this feeling develops, as is well- 
known, an extraordinary power. It is dangerous to drive cattle 
over an area that is red with the blood of their kind. The sight 
of impending danger has indeed often enflamed even quite un-
involved bystanders to [perform] heroic acts and even to the 
self- denying sacrifice of their own lives. Aside from the emo-
tion prompted by danger to oneself, there is scarcely a stron-
ger, more captivating one. That the solidarity of fellow- feeling 
65
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
89
extends beyond the bounds of humanity is made evident by 
the fact that the killing of animals fills one with quite analo-
gous, sometimes weaker feelings.5
Compassion, pity, empathy, sympathy, benevolence, and the feeling 
of honor all have the same basis, which is also adapted to moral 
judgment.
At this point, one can understand and appraise the famous 
teachings of Hume and Adam Smith, according to which the ba-
sis of moral judgment about the actions and volitional dispositions 
of other persons lies in sympathy. This sympathy is, according to 
Hume, ultimately a kind of conjoint movement, a pulsation trans-
ferred from one living being to another. Adam Smith has thor-
oughly analyzed this conjoint feeling of human beings, and he finds 
that ethical behavior draws its common cognitive and real basis from 
sympathy. According to him, the re- creation of a feeling evoked by 
what signals or occasions it is weaker than the original feeling.
The deficiency of this theory is that it wants to proceed without 
taking account of personal ethical experience because it is viewed as 
merely derivative. In actuality, however, the joy found in acting cou-
rageously, energetically and in making sacrifices for others is always 
linked with felt experiences of the intrinsic value of such volitional 
dispositions.
Section 12: The Psychological Illusion Involved 
in the Eudaemonic and Utilitarian Conception 
of the Foregoing Basic Moral Phenomena
My main contention about utilitarianism was that it remains stuck 
at the psychological surface of the ethical world. This world can 
now be given a deeper first grounding.
The volitional dispositions that are accompanied by the joyous 
consciousness of a raised level of feeling and evoke admiration, en-
thusiasm, and approval from others— are the mainsprings of all ac-
tions that go beyond the life of the drives and the utilization of the 
objective causes of feelings in the interest of the person. They are 
the moral forces that stand altogether alone in producing the gen-
eral good based on the life of drives, but aimed at guiding the latter 
5 Adolf Horwicz, Analyse der qualitativen Gefühle (Magdeburg: Faber, 1878), 
309– 310. (D).
66
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
90 
I
and overcoming them, as well as in producing a harmony of drives 
that is conducive to the well- being of the individual.
Courage can also enter into the service of crime. Accordingly, the 
history of great robbers has an attraction not only for the crude, 
but also for the higher instincts and natural feelings of the masses, 
which counterbalances the abhorrence of crime. Courage is an 
available higher power to which approbation attaches, but it is also 
capable of immoral application. Nevertheless, by virtue of its higher 
essential nature, courage can form an order that reaches beyond 
animal life and promotes well- being.
Plan- based activity can be used in any dubious market enterprise 
and in the pursuit of a career directed by a bold egoism.
The forces that effectuate solidarity, active and energetic cooper-
ation, common well- being, and the higher achievements of society, 
prove to be useful to [social] interests and conducive to enjoyment 
and well- being.
 This produces the psychological illusion that the successful re-
sults of these forces account for the joy in their exercise and the 
approval of the same in others.
This illusion, however, dissolves the concrete impulse into a sen-
timental morality of well- being. The heroic feeling, the joy in cre-
ating, and devotion are eliminated in service to a dull leveling and 
mechanization.
The ethical [import] of these feelings cannot be separated from 
their power in bringing about contentment. For courage, consistency, 
etc., yield a satisfaction, that liberates us from external affects, fear, 
hope, etc. These feelings have the capacity of keeping the passions and 
drives under control to some extent. Thus, the possibility of attaining 
an inner contentment emerges.
This possibility must be combined with that of reducing friction 
in the affects. Here [we must consider] our feelings for others.
Section 13: Feelings for Others and Their 
Cultivation into Ethical Processes
1. All feelings for others, i.e., feelings that are aroused through con-
tact with other persons, are complex and most of them to a very high 
degree. They are formed by the interaction of stimuli released by sev-
eral processes that originate through various circumstantial factors. A 
corporal rushes toward a certain soldier in his troop formation with 
a loud curse thereby exciting both the culprit and his fellow soldiers. 
The unease or alarm of those who are not involved contains within 
67
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
91
itself a mix of quite diverse emotional factors, although its effect is 
entirely simple. The sudden, loud noise, the harsh expressions, a vague 
feeling that something is not right also with oneself, the suspicion that 
it could be one’s own turn on another occasion— all of these factors 
are instantaneously fused with each other in this unease.6
2. Thus, in surveying these feelings and impulses, one must start 
with specific ones; it would be quite incorrect to lay down com-
passion, benevolence or love as a general class of feeling and then 
to consider specific feelings as their modifications. Many moralists 
do this; they invert the actual situation by considering the univer-
sal first. Compassion, love, friendship, patriotism, and humaneness 
are quite diverse and highly complicated feelings, dispositions, 
inclinations.
3.  But in all of them an elementary relationship forms a presuppo-
sition which at present cannot be further clarified. Every feeling for 
others can only originate by means of an imaginative re- creation 
of what occurs in the other person (theory of understanding). This 
re- creation is not an intellectual process, but rather is achieved by 
means of a movement of the same feelings, motivating impulses and 
incentives that take place in the other person. Thus, it always rests 
on a commonality, a solidarity of human nature. This re- creation 
extends not only to pleasure or pain in others; compassion and 
shared joy are strictly speaking only partial feelings abstracted from 
this actual process of imaginative re- creation.
4. Here the following distinction becomes important. In imagina-
tively responding to a cry of pain, my consciousness of solidarity 
may be stronger than that of another person. The cry may mean 
more to me than to the other person. This has to do with the fact 
that in some the elements of communion with fellow human beings 
are more developed [than in others]— an original moral distinction.
Understanding or imaginative re- creation always results from 
the same processes that transpire in the other person. In every as-
pect it is accompanied by a consciousness of commonality, of iden-
tity. This takes the form of a lived experience. This consciousness 
grows with every process that I share with others. It is diminished 
every time that I experience separation. Habituation is the strongest 
6 Horwicz, Analyse der qualitativen Gefühle, 310. (D).
68
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
92 
I
factor. When I raise it explicitly to consciousness, the ethical princi-
ple of love as well as the poetry of love can become effective.
There are also other feelings that contribute to the reflexive reac-
tions of the self, e.g., the sense that what has happened to someone 
else can also happen to me. Then there are the associations that 
Hobbes and Spinoza emphasize. Solitude allows us to be reduced to 
our weak self.
At this point we discover anew the psychological one- sidedness 
and superficiality of utilitarianism. We do not only re- create feelings 
that contain pleasure or displeasure and those that express gain or 
loss. Dispositions, strivings, and motivating impulses are also re- 
created and evoke feelings that are connected to the re- creative process 
itself. Greatness can expand the psyche; smallness can arouse pleas-
ant feelings of superiority by way of comparison. Above all, how-
ever, everything that strengthens solidarity, eliminates friction, and 
results in cooperation, mutual transparency, genuine understanding, 
and agreement, evokes a corresponding pleasant feeling. By contrast, 
a divergence of interests, lack of understanding and transparency, 
alienation, are sensed as painful feelings of various degrees.
The feeling of solidarity would be misconceived if one tried to 
derive it from the consideration of the advantageous consequences 
of community, genuine understanding, and agreement. There can be 
no doubt that awareness of these consequences is a factor in [such] 
feelings; however, in many cases the force of these feelings goes im-
measurably far beyond this consideration of consequences so that 
this explanation can hardly be accepted. The motivating responses 
to someone drowning, going hungry, or freezing, can result in the 
greatest sacrifice in which the consideration of the consequences 
for ourselves remains insignificant. The elementary basis for these 
responses is established at an age when the calculation of conse-
quences is still excluded. Already at the age of one- and- a- half years, 
my son cried whenever he believed that any of us were hurting our-
selves, or that any of us were being harmed by another person.
It is equally the case that compassion is not at all as archetypal 
as Schopenhauer assumes. Compassion is rather a partial content of 
the more encompassing phenomenon of solidarity.
This solidarity is the same phenomenon that in the realm of knowl-
edge asserts itself as universal validity and as a striving for it and its 
preservation. Just as constancy, coherence, and universal validity 
are the basic incentives of thought, so in practical life [the basic in-
centives are] consistency, the capacity to plan, and solidarity. They 
are evidently metaphysical relations, which like seminal symbols 
69
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
93
are expressed in these basic traits and are akin to each other in the 
intellectual and moral spheres.
Section 14: Benevolence
1. The consciousness of solidarity is not a theoretical insight, but 
rather a felt and sensible state. In all its forms it is rooted in an 
animalistic co- stirring of nervous systems, but this, taken in and 
for itself, can lead to the cruelty of wild animals and the enjoyment 
that idle people find in funerals and scandalous stories just as much 
as it can lead to fellow- feeling. In the feeling of fellowship there is 
the consciousness of a bond as an intermediate stage that leads to 
active participation.
2. This disposition of our feeling and willing develops in the various 
forms of common life; in each of these forms the consciousness of a 
bond is a productive power. Its original nucleus first becomes visi-
ble, as it were, when a bond weaves itself in the smiling and affec-
tionate glances between mother and child. We already experience it 
here before a sexual union brings about an actual bond. Additional 
forms lie in the consciousness of the family, in polite society, in 
political associations, in love, and in friendship as fellowship. The 
feelings of solidarity develop through these stable relationships; 
they provide the schooling for all higher feelings of benevolence, 
love, and sacrifice. In the stable network [of these relationships] we 
always find the genuine substance of [such feelings].
3. Finally, the free forms of interest, love and friendship, and socia-
ble feelings emerge; they never are part of the ethical substance of 
life; they are merely its ornaments.
4. From all these feelings, we extract as their common moral sub-
stance an emotional attitude that we call benevolence, which we 
will now describe.
Benevolence liberates us from the narrowness involved in the 
consciousness of self- worth. It widens our outlook: the benevolent 
will expands itself to wherever there is well- being, suffering, and 
human worth. Kant refers benevolence exclusively to the happi-
ness of others. Lotze7 appears to agree with him when he— against 
7 Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817– 1881), German philosopher, originally a physi-
ologist and physician, who attempted to unify German idealism and natural science.
70
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
94 
I
Herbart,8 admittedly with complete justification— observes that 
benevolence does not involve a bare relation of wills, but rather 
presupposes well- being and suffering in a second will. With that he 
designates, however, only the outer bound at which benevolence be-
gins: [assuming that] one does not include in benevolence anything 
like the preservation of non- sentient organisms, which after all is 
grounded on other motives— provided that there is no disguised 
benevolence here [operating] through the poetic power to imagine 
sentience in such [organisms]. Benevolence in its full and complete 
actualization concerns others as persons, in accordance with their 
unconditional worth, as imagined by analogy with the experience 
of self- worth. Thus, [benevolence] widens and deepens itself con-
stantly according to the content of the object that provides its mo-
tivation, and according to the insight of the benevolent subject into 
this content and [its] constant and true interest. Since benevolence 
attaches our will to the world of values, through the well- being, 
suffering, and worth, not of ourselves, but of others, it raises itself 
above the level of individual persons and must organize them into a 
larger whole by means of a third synthesis.9
5. The connection between fellow- feeling and active benevolence is 
expressed in the concept of participation. This concept of participa-
tion aptly indicates that solidarity is the basis of benevolence.
6. Indifference and aversion pass imperceptibly into each other. The 
lack or absence of any kind of bond, together with a distance from 
the activities of other human beings that reduces them to mere ci-
phers, result in an indifferent attitude toward [their] happiness or 
unhappiness:
It seems undeniable that a very great number of persons, per-
haps the great majority of those whom we are acquainted with, 
leave us completely indifferent. For instance, when we read in 
the newspaper that Smith is dead, even knowing that Smith is 
8 Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776– 1841), German philosopher and educational 
reformer.
9 Dilthey took this paragraph from an earlier essay entitled “Versuch einer Anal-
yse des moralischen Bewußsteins” originally published in 1864. See GS, VI, 46– 47. 
In that essay, Dilthey spoke of three moral synthetic claims on us: the first synthesis 
demands that we live up to our own sense of self- worth, and the second points us to 
the worth of others. The third synthesis relates us to something larger than ourselves 
in which we participate.
71
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
95
the man that we saw every day with the grey hat and yellow 
gloves walking toward X at such- and- such a time, the coffee 
still tastes just as good to us on this morning as on any other. 
But when we want immediately to conclude from this that 
we are totally indifferent to Smith, that would certainly be 
very premature. Let us take a similar case for comparison. 
We have right in front of us a page of the newspaper from an 
unfamiliar, large city, and our eye scans totally apathetically 
across the names Miller, Meyer, Klutentreter, and Schöten-
sack, who died, got married, or were lucky to become fathers. 
Here we feel nothing, absolutely nothing. But why so? Be-
cause we do not know anything about all these good people. 
Here it is naturally not surprising that no feeling stirs within 
us, because all the conditions for generating feeling are com-
pletely lacking.10
In all such cases, the reason for indifference is unfamiliarity 
with the inner life of the person involved. We can assess neither 
the humanity, nor the degree of suffering, in that person. In other 
cases, a pleasant feeling outweighs [a concern for others]; news of 
the death of a remote acquaintance does not appreciably disturb 
our appetite at breakfast. Again in other [cases], a low degree of 
dislike or aversion hides behind the indifference that we express. 
A human being whose appearance does not inspire our affection, 
is already for that reason the object of a slightly discernible aver-
sion. This dislike grows when we are approached by the demand 
for sacrifice.
I just read in the newspaper (1890) that a 14- year- old babysitter 
killed the child entrusted to her while the parents were at church. 
The delinquent stated the reason for the act to be a dislike for the 
little creature and disinclination for the duties of a babysitter. Here 
the minimal concern for someone who is indifferent to us turns 
into hatred. In many cases murder is committed because of worries 
about sustenance. Suspension of the solidarity of feeling and hatred 
for other human beings as a kind of barbaric degeneration must be 
viewed as the real basis for many acts of murder. A youth meets a 
man on the street and strikes him dead for the sake of a new pair 
of boots.
10 Horwicz, Analyse der qualitativen Gefühle, 428. (D).
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
96 
I
7. Certain processes can arouse reactive- feelings. Something bygone 
can arouse a feeling of thankfulness or revenge. However, where 
emotional disposition or circumstances alter this simple course, [we 
obtain feelings] of either ingratitude or forgiveness. Likewise, trust 
and mistrust arise in anticipation of future feelings. Thankfulness 
comes with a sense of being obligated. This is indeed expressed in 
the phrase “much obliged.” In serving another an obligation is be-
ing assumed, as it were, and thankfulness is the emotive expression 
of it. Consequently, thankfulness is burdensome where no inner 
bond exists.
8. The feeling and the impulse that respond to an injury, we call 
revenge. Exclusion from the union of solidarity, arising from re-
venge or other causes, we call hate. It is the inner renunciation of 
the consciousness of being bound. It therefore [contains] something 
constrictive, abnormal; the psyche strives to be freed from it. Ac-
cordingly, in hate we find ourselves diminished, internally torn; ha-
bitual hatred deteriorates the soul.
The feelings of benevolence are connected to a pleasant expan-
sion of the self. The feeling of hatred destroys the inner harmony of 
the soul and diminishes its level of feeling.
Section 15: Compassion (Sympathy as a Moral 
Principle and Altruism in the Positivist School)
Contrary to the position we have developed so far, many ethicists 
detach sympathy and compassion from the consciousness of soli-
darity and regard them as a being stirred by feeling. This conception 
can be thought of as the animalistic explanation of benevolence and 
of love.
There have been important researchers who, whenever they con-
sider what appears in society and the moral world in terms of its 
actual incentives, are driven to probe what motivates benevolence, 
sympathy, and compassion. In doing so, they find themselves in-
clined to isolate a feeling [of being- stirred] from the more uplifting 
aspects of the human spirit and [instead] look for it in the elemen-
tary level of animalistically based feelings.11
11 Starting with the next paragraph of these ethics lectures, Dilthey again quotes 
from his 1864 essay, “Versuch einer Analyse des moralischen Bewusstseins.” See Ge-
sammelte Schriften, VI, 34– 39.
72
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
97
A well- developed theory— that stems from an invisible link with 
a systematic whole and is compatible with the state of modern 
ethical research since Kant— is finally produced by Schopenhauer. 
Another exponent of this theory at present is Lotze. At least he ac-
knowledges in his Microcosmus that:
for an impartial person . . . to care for oneself is natural but 
not morally meritorious. To do good for someone else and to 
increase the sum of pleasure that the world enjoys, is the only 
task in whose fulfillment all his moral duties converge.12
We may nevertheless make a hypothetical supposition based on 
the system in question here, if we are permitted to combine this 
quotation with Herbart’s explication of justice: Conflict displeases, 
or better yet, what displeases us about conflict is exclusively the 
malevolence of the parties; this seems to indicate that justice and 
benevolence belong together.13 But what displeases us in conflict, 
which contains a violation of justice, is not in the first instance that 
malevolence has free play, but rather that there is a breach of the 
sense of what is right or just and the duty of being committed to it. 
Unfortunately, the chapter on ethics in Lotze’s Microcosmus gives 
such a limited insight into the principle and systematic aim of Lotze’s 
ethics that we must turn to Schopenhauer’s ethics, without being 
able to develop Lotze’s purer version of its motivation.
Schopenhauer worked out his theory twice: synthetically in the 
fourth book of The World as Will and Representation, [and] ana-
lytically in the prize essay On The Basis of Morality. In the former 
work, the overall theory is shown to be the ethical consequence 
of his subjective idealism. All multiplicity is only apparent, for all 
individuals of this world manifest the one and only true being of 
the Will. Accordingly, the distinction between I and not- I is abol-
ished. Now when this same negation of our independent and iso-
lated existence that is achieved in philosophy by means of thought 
is expressed in action— when the cognitive insight “my being exists 
in every living being” bursts forth in a deed, then we have obvi-
ously reached the metaphysical ground of all moral behavior in hu-
manity. The phenomenon that emerges in this process, however, is 
compassion.
12 Lotze, Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the 
World, trans. Elizabeth Hamilton and E. E. Constance Jones (Edinburgh: T. & T. 
Clark, 1887), Vol. I, Book V, Chap. V, 693.
13 Ibid., 691.
73
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
98 
I
Critique of This Theory
Correctly viewed, what we have here is an analogy rather than an 
identity with the psychological phenomenon of compassion. Both 
the penetrating power and the weakness of Schopenhauer’s proce-
dural method derive essentially from the way he marshals phenom-
ena in the world of experience to verify metaphysical propositions 
of the most abstract kind. The[se] general propositions are not the 
result of scientific induction from observations and yet the observa-
tions purport to prove the general propositions. The world of laws 
that mediates between single observations and ultimate principles 
is pushed out of philosophy, leaving us with an arbitrary stitching 
together of these concrete phenomena and ultimate grounds in their 
free playground.
Compassion is directed at another person qua other and is uncon-
ditionally different from the sensation of a pain. Accordingly, we can 
experience compassion with ourselves only by very artificially stand-
ing apart from ourselves as onlooking strangers. Can this compassion 
be regarded as somehow identical with an intuition (or whatever one 
would call this mystical act), through which the partition between 
ourselves and others as distinct existences is to be lifted and through 
which this distinctness would become merely illusory? This mixing 
of two quite heterogeneous acts can be seen in the following self- 
contradictory utterances: “The deed of a generous person expresses 
a cognitive awareness” and “this cognitive awareness manifests itself 
as compassion.” The truth underlying this analogy is that homogene-
ity is a presupposition of compassion and that a growing or expand-
ing sense and recognition of this homogeneity also allows the inten-
sity and scope of compassion to grow. Herein lay the great power 
that Christianity exercised on the growth of benevolent sentiments: 
It joined humans together in various forms of brotherly fellowship.
A curious consequence of his metaphysical concept of compas-
sion is drawn by Schopenhauer when he relates “genuine virtue” to a 
“goodness of disposition”14 that renders the fate of a stranger equiv-
alent to one’s own: It is a disposition that according to Schopen-
hauer could never go beyond these limits. Indeed, recognizing the 
identity of the I and the not- I contains nothing more, and it is im-
possible for anything different to result from it. But this shows how 
compassion must, in fact, be distinguished from Schopenhauer’s 
14 Arthur Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, trans. E.F.J. 
Payne (New York: Dover Publications, 1966), Vol. I, 367– 369.
74
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   98
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
99
cognitive insight, for almost every intimate link that arouses strong 
compassion produces sacrificial actions in which we do something 
for someone else that we would never do for ourselves. The heteroge-
neity of compassion and the recognition of identity that [Schopen-
hauer] discerns in action can be made clearer if we assume that we 
are devoted to a great number of people. If there appears in all of 
them only the same Will as in me, our sacrifice here, too, can go 
only so far as a complete equalization of their fortune with ours. 
On the contrary, the individual actually senses his relation to the 
whole quite differently in that he puts his entire life on the line even 
for an only insignificant advancement of the whole.
When it comes, then, to the further question of the justification 
of the principle [of compassion] apart from this unity of metaphys-
ical and psychological conceptions of compassion, we do best to 
look for this in Schopenhauer’s essay On the Basis of Morality.
There we are skillfully primed for the thesis that compassion is 
the only motive of the moral world. Skepticism is used as a scare 
tactic that only self- denying actions can refute. Then the anti- moral 
forces emerge that reduce all this to egoism. In the meantime, purity 
of heart, pensiveness, and similar virtues are completely ignored. 
Thus, we arrive at the proposition: “The absence of all egoistic mo-
tivation is, therefore, the criterion of an action of moral worth.”15
To prove this proposition, axioms are provided that already 
contain the main point to be demonstrated. Thus, according to the 
third axiom, only well- being and suffering move our wills.16 Con-
sequently, a moral incentive appeals to well- being and suffering, 
either our own or that of others. Insofar as the above proposition 
that egoism and moral worth exclude each other is applied here, the 
true moral motive is already there. There is only one moral moti-
vation, namely, that the well- being and suffering of another should 
be immediately mine. This line of argument dispenses with a deeper 
investigation of the driving forces in our motivations. In this way, it 
also achieves at the same time the advantage of seeing naked egoism 
whenever our motivations take ourselves into consideration.
With this motive, compassion is identified through the hypoth-
esis of the distinctive positivity of pain. This hypothesis has hardly 
anything going for it, with perhaps this exception: When popu-
lar consciousness is informed that pain is not something negative 
15 Arthur Schopenhauer, On The Basis of Morality, trans. E.F.J. Payne (Bobbs- 
Merrill, 1965), Chap. III, Sec. 15, 140.
16 See Schopenhauer, On The Basis of Morality, 141.
75
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   99
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
100 
I
because it is the opposite of pleasure, but rather is of a positive na-
ture, the most natural [conclusion] is to regard pleasure, the oppo-
site of pain, as negative. Schopenhauer repeats, over and over again 
in ever new, suggestive phraseology, that when a wish is satisfied, it 
disappears as does its enjoyment. This presupposes that enjoyment 
exists only in comparison with the wish, which, in turn, already 
presupposes that it is negative. This doctrine is untenable and most 
obviously refuted by any thorough psychological theory that makes 
room for higher forms of pleasure that do not presuppose any needs 
rooted in pain. The upshot for [Schopenhauer’s] principle of ethics 
is that the most ideal form of benevolence, the supportive participa-
tion in the happiness of others, can only be incorporated into it in a 
roundabout way. In fact, joyous emotional engagement with others 
is a wholly original human sentiment.
Shared joy has the same significance in the moral world as com-
passionate suffering. Both would lack inner worth if they contained 
nothing but a mere repetition of the same sentiment— even if it were 
also mediated by the recognition that the Will in the I and the not- I 
is the same. Only when we sense a pain as essentially foreign to us, 
but as ours in terms of how we assess it, does the moral nature of 
compassion rise above a mere psychological engagement. This be-
comes even clearer in the case of benevolence.
 The supplements to The World as Will and Representation in 
the second volume provide an adequately clear explication of the 
true nature of [the above] principle in Schopenhauer:
On this metaphysical identity of the will as thing- in- itself rest 
in general three phenomena despite the vast multiplicity of 
its appearances, which can be brought under the concept of 
sympathy: 1) . . . compassion, which is, as I have shown, the 
basis of justice and philanthropy, caritas; 2) sexual love, with 
capricious selection, amor, which is the life of the species, as-
serting its priority over that of individuals; 3) magic, to which 
also belong animal magnetism and sympathetic cures.17
There is, however, only one ethical act in which the Will becomes 
its own subject: the denial of the will. Everything else is only a 
phenomenal process or striving. And thus it is actually only an ac-
commodation to our occidental outlook that we talk about moral 
motives other than that of denial. This way of submerging the moral 
17 The World as Will and Representation, Vol. II, Supplements to Fourth Book, 
Ch. 47, pp.601– 02.
76
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
101
into the physical leads to the utmost point on which Kant and 
Schopenhauer are quite diametrically opposed. In understanding 
the elementary forms of morality we find in Kant’s “Doctrine of Vir-
tue” that “Amphiboly in Moral Concepts of Reflection” according to 
which the cruel treatment of animals is objectionable only because 
compassion for human suffering— a disposition very conducive to 
morality— would be gradually extinguished.18 Here it cannot be 
contested that this view falls far short of the penetrating way in which 
Schopenhauer, to the extent that pains are experienced in the world, 
recognizes the alleviation of these pains as a motive of immediate 
ethical significance.
Schopenhauer derives justice from compassion. It arises, so to 
speak, at a lower level of compassion, in that it restrains me from 
harming others (neminem laede!) Justice is accordingly a negative 
mode of compassion. If compassion lies at the origin of justice and 
right, the distinctive character of the latter, which is to exhibit 
general laws originating from the nature of things and to obligate 
humans unconditionally, must be arbitrarily arrived at. Then sud-
denly,19 the possibility materializes that instead of unregulated stir-
rings of compassion, rational reflection adopts once and for all the 
firm resolve to respect the rights of everyone. Abruptly, Schopen-
hauer allows for the existence of principles that very inadequately 
represent the universal nature of justice and right. But as they are 
only derived from the fact that a maxim could indeed be formed 
from the awareness of the suffering produced by acts of injustice, 
it is easy to show that the love of humanity could also lead us to 
adopt such resolutions and embrace such principles. Strangely over-
looked here is the possibility of deriving the universality of the pre-
cepts of justice from their negative character, which is the distinct 
advantage of locating the origin of right in the love of humanity. In-
stead, the negative character of justice is used to derive the “right 
of compulsion.”20
Ethics is never any better than the metaphysical view of the 
world on which it is based. When nothing truly exists in the world 
except as a dull Will without the power to represent, all phenom-
ena become illusory, and then the one crucial point is to overcome 
this illusion— partially in compassion and totally in the denial of 
18 See Immanuel Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, trans. Mary J. Gregor (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 192– 193.
19 See Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, Vol. I, 339f.
20 See Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, Vol. I, 340.
77
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
102 
I
the will. In a world where intelligence itself is only secondary and 
where every purpose pending before the will is a foolish affirmation 
of our own existence, only the passive motive remains. The nerve 
of action, positive purposes that fulfill our existence, have vanished. 
This ethics begins at the same starting point as the life- celebrating 
eudaemonic school in that well- being and suffering provide the en-
tire content of our motives. When this motivation, solely and com-
pletely determined by well- being and suffering, enters into an odd 
alliance with Kant’s principles, the following disjunctive conclusion 
follows: Promoting one’s own well- being or preventing one’s own 
suffering is no moral motive; increasing the suffering of others or 
disturbing their well- being is an immoral motive. All that is left (as-
suming such a motivational law) is the overcoming of the suffering 
of others. This ethics, then, is encapsulated in the ancient Indian 
prayer: “May all living creatures remain free from pain.” But then 
one suddenly sees this law of motivation, not in Kant’s way, but 
quite arbitrarily violated by the Will denying itself.21
Pity22 and the Tragic Effect
Fellow- feeling plays a great role in all tragic and dramatic poetry, 
for the tragic has to do with suffering.
Pity, however, is merely the feeling that precedes the tragic senti-
ment. [The latter is a fellow- feeling] based on being- stirred , imag-
inative understanding and re- creation. Consciousness of a kinship 
is part of it and indeed elevates it to a higher level. On this, then, is 
grounded a kind of consciousness of the solidarity of human des-
tiny. We see projected onto the magnified magic mirror of the stage 
the contours of the great agents of human suffering. Thus, Lear is 
everywhere that ingratitude is felt as an ethical anomaly or as in-
justice; and Hamlet is everywhere that ethical sensitivity confronts 
the hard and rough machinery of the world. Faust says to Gretchen: 
“The woe of all mankind seizes me.”23 This glimpse into solidarity 
[and] community (thus, an emotional universality) at once height-
ens and releases inner tensions. The pain of life is transformed into 
a living thing. In Xenien, Schiller speaks of “the great, gigantic 
21 This ends the passage taken from Dilthey’s 1864 essay.
22 Moving from Schopenhauer to the Aristotelian conception of tragedy, the 
word Mitleid is no longer translated as compassion, but as pity.
23 Goethe, Faust, Part I, the Dungeon Scene.
78
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
103
destiny that elevates humans, while it crushes them.”24 Why trag-
edy? Consciousness is raised through understanding, but what is 
ultimate in life, its ultimate tension at least, is to see death coming 
and not fear it.
Section 16: Respect for the Other  
as an End in Itself
This feeling of solidarity is connected to that of the independence 
of the other person.
1. The external or what cannot be controlled by the will is there as 
alien. Thus, the will is the first to experience that something alien, 
uncontrollable, something other, is there.
2. The will experiences the antagonism of an alien volitional force: 
It holds its ground, so to speak, against that force. This alien voli-
tional force excites fear to the extent that it is obscure and unintelli-
gible. The unintelligibility or irrationality of a manifestation of will 
is connected with fear even at the level of the highest culture.
3. But as one experiences more and more the homogeneity of all 
other human beings with oneself, an understanding of them and a 
solidarity of interests emerge; these same feelings pulsate in other 
persons, and an emotional coordination allows me to take an inter-
est in them. Others exhibit the same will and striving to control ob-
jects; the other is the same as myself; I can imaginatively put myself 
in the place of others. Wills cooperate in a group; they experience 
the solidarity of their purposes.
4. The will of the other also possesses a core, just like my will, in 
the attainment of satisfaction within the life of feelings. My will has 
in this way even its absolute point: It is hereby aware of itself as 
being there for its own sake. This goes as far as the satisfaction of 
the moral feeling (contentment). I discover the same core in others. 
Compassionate and shared joy allows me to feel it.
5. Thus, respect or esteem for other persons develops so that they 
possess, as do I, a core in the life of their feelings, by which they 
24 Friedrich Schiller, Xenie #407, in Goethe and Schiller, Xenien. Dilthey mistak-
enly referred to the Die Braut von Messina.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
104 
I
rely on themselves and are there for themselves. For where a self- 
consciousness appears— which relates to the past as well as to the 
future through feelings, and completes the cycle of stimulation and 
action by producing a satisfying mental state— there exists a purpose, 
an end in itself. By end- in- itself we could not possibly mean anything 
other than this.
6. This consciousness pervasively underlies all formulae that pur-
port to derive basic concepts of duty and right. Esteeming oneself 
(as an end in itself), acknowledging the worth of the other (as end 
in itself), solidarity between the other and me based on an inner re-
lationship: These are states of affairs that we are not in a position to 
derive further (Cicero, natural law, etc.). The most perfect formula 
is found in Kant: Respect every human being like yourself, as an 
end in itself. Its real content appears less perfectly in the categorical 
imperative since it purports to derive, from the mere concept of rea-
son the subordination of the will under a law that respects everyone 
as much as myself. It is in the will and the feelings connected with 
it that we locate the determinations that express themselves in a 
whole group of facts: fellow- feeling, sympathy, consciousness of 
commonality, consciousness of solidarity, respect for other human 
beings as self- conscious, independent beings with their own center 
of feeling and willing. That formula of the categorical impera-
tive, however, draws together these determinations of feeling and 
willing— which are related, but distinct— into an abstract unity.
Section 17: The Relation between Respect for the 
Intrinsic Worth of Others and the Obligation 
of Gratitude, Promising, and Truthfulness
A Methodological Generalization from  
the Preceding
1. Here, in one instance, a peculiarity of the components and pro-
cesses in the life of feeling and willing becomes prominent. By com-
paring stimulating images and their constituents, one can develop, 
within certain limits of reliability, the elements of perception and 
primary processes. We can ascertain, likewise within certain limits, 
the driving mechanisms that have a controllable, bodily correlate 
in reflex mechanisms. By contrast, we have no such advantage with 
higher- level capacities, volitions, and feelings. We can only link an 
anthropological- historical analysis with a psychological- ethical one. 
79
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
105
This yields the result that certain basic characteristics of volitions, 
which we can also conceive as their elementary processes, man-
ifest themselves in different but related ways when the milieu is 
changed. This is how the activation of power, energy, courage, and 
the eagerness to work are related. Fellow- feeling, solidarity, and 
respect for others as ends in themselves are similarly related. The 
archetypal phenomenon is that each instance of fellow- feeling, of 
love, has its roots in commonality and solidarity, and does not can-
cel the consciousness of being an intrinsic end oneself, but encom-
passes it.
2. This archetypal phenomenon is manifested in life- experience in 
such a way that this union of inner understanding and inner belong-
ing encompasses a primordial activation of a feeling of fellowship 
and care for others. This fact is everywhere demonstrable through 
the study of primitive peoples and can then also be shown as the 
basis of the ethical development of cultured nations. Whoever finds 
himself outside the solidarity of the nomadic tribe is considered 
alien and hostile.
3. Accordingly, the assumption of an original benevolent feeling 
that encompasses all living beings is a fiction. Being engaged and 
having our feelings stirred by suffering or joy outside us is an ele-
mentary phenomenon. It is everywhere connected with the imagi-
native re- creation and vicarious understanding of the inner states 
of others. But this presupposes an already existing consciousness of 
a bond and commonality, and is dependent on them. Thus, on the 
general foundation of fellow- feelings that reach back into animal 
life, we develop benevolence and respect for the interests of others 
(i.e., for what is centered in their feelings and will and for what 
emanates from them).
4. This general characteristic of the volitions relating human beings 
receives a modification and reshaping when particular volitions of 
persons interact in regular relationships. The volition and accom-
plishment of A, who is equal in value to B, cannot be accepted with-
out obligating B to eventually undertake a corresponding feat. We 
designate the second undertaking an obligation or duty; it bears 
the character of an ought. The acceptance of an express commit-
ment must lead the unity of the I to fulfill this obligation. Contract, 
law, justice, and the sense of what is right or just are based on this 
relation. Likewise, what is inner must completely express itself in 
80
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
106 
I
language, gesture, and deed where there is real solidarity: For gen-
uine understanding and commonality are entirely rooted in this 
transparency, and accordingly they are the prerequisite for love, 
friendship, duty. Thus, truthfulness in this highest sense is the basis 
for life’s closest relationships. It excludes not only lying, but also 
secrecy, which is just as dangerous. Moreover, truthfulness, as the 
congruence of what is inner and what is uttered is the condition of 
human communication insofar as there is commonality. The ethical 
consciousness of the value of truthfulness is accordingly grounded 
on the fact that establishing a cohesion among human beings is 
entirely founded on the disclosure of what is inner to what is out-
side and the establishment of this commonality is the basis of all 
moral feelings of association and of benevolence. Truthfulness is 
the general condition under which individuals do not regard each 
other as alien, inscrutable, and therefore repulsive, but rather open 
themselves up to each other. Thus, it is the actual basis of societal 
and moral life. i.e., truthfulness parallels industriousness in supple-
menting the most primary virtue of sympathetic feeling. Together, 
they make a social world possible.
 
Section 18: Commitment and Duty
1. To the extent that self- consciousness forms a personality on the 
basis of an identity with oneself, an enduring commitment arises 
through a tacit or express act of the will. This commitment also oc-
curs when what is done is performed on the presupposition of mutu-
ality and when its acceptance establishes a mutual life- relationship.
2. Thus, the will is committed and limited as it strives to move from 
a state of need to satisfaction. This possibility is based on the capac-
ity of the will to not be overwhelmed by impressions, but rather to 
remain true and bound to itself over time.
It is committed, however, only as a consequence of something 
which it has itself expressly or tacitly affirmed, through an act 
which it undertook or through a relationship in which it entered. 
Both are based on mutuality. Even when the will binds itself, not to 
another, but to itself— a case to which the label of obligation can be 
applied only by extrapolation— the will divides itself, so to speak, 
into earlier and later acts. We are truly obligated, however, only vis- 
à- vis another to whom we are bound because our will concluded 
an act or entered a relationship, requiring us to remain the same 
over time.
81
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
107
3. Right and duty in this sense encompass, therefore, the whole 
sphere of well- grounded mutuality, even when this ground involves 
no legal constraint, no compulsion of duty or prohibition. Indeed, 
it extends even to relationships in which mutual obligation is not 
based on any expressly laid- down arrangement, but on a legitimate 
and tacit mutual presupposition.
4. And here a constant growth in the commitment to what is right 
is to be observed, in that more and more is included in this mutu-
ality. Thus, the position of those who provide service is increasingly 
absorbed into this mutual relation over the course of history. An 
advance beyond the patriarchal conception of society occurs when-
ever a relation based on the exclusive rule of benevolence shifts to 
one of law and duty. Only they provide the full (though not always 
legally binding) protection of interests, due to their distinctive char-
acter of universality and binding obligation, according to which 
a violation of the commitment to what is right evokes an entirely 
different reaction than when benevolence is withheld.
5. When compulsion within an association is added to this relation-
ship and endowed with absolute (not merely relative) coercive mea-
sures, then a judicial system of law emerges. Such a system is distin-
guished from the already specified ethical relations merely through 
its power to enforce. The solution to the fundamental problem of 
justice and law is, on the one hand, to ground it in the ethical dis-
positions and developments to which we have referred. But on the 
other hand, it comes with the power to enforce and is unthinkable 
without this. It would be incorrect to overlook these two sides. One 
could think of the judicial system as founded merely on the power of 
enforcement, but then one overlooks the great facts of customary 
and international law. A judicial system is marked by an original 
duality: Internally, it stems from associations based on private and 
family rights; externally, it manifests itself in criminal law and re-
venge. This then expresses itself in two respective feelings of justice.
Insofar as the will views itself as committed to the world of val-
ues through duty and justice, the moral world attains its completion 
objectively in a hierarchy of values.
6. From a personal standpoint, this commitment involves a sense of 
what is right or just. It comes with its own feeling of duty to mu-
tual order and possesses a moral value completely independent of 
any purposes. One should not conceive of laws and duties as mere 
82
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
108 
I
mechanisms by which benevolence is actualized— as Lotze seems in-
clined to do— since this attitude of the human will towards the world 
of values is unconditionally distinctive and possesses a totally inde-
pendent moral value.
Hume, in order to prove that justice is only a means to general 
utility, depicted a world of luxurious abundance in which a sys-
tem of laws would be completely superfluous. But then the sense of 
what is right and the order of values would at the same time vanish 
from such a world, (since] the need for them is not situational, but 
rather is grounded in human nature. Judicial relations would then 
derive more from family rights, or from the lawful ordering of the 
higher values, forms of dependence, etc. As long as there are wills 
aiming at values and standing in relationships, there will also be 
lawfulness.
The same problem manifests itself in the other case presented by 
Hume, where one imagines an unbounded benevolence that unites 
the human race into one family and replaces justice. One would 
thereby think away the clear, distinct division that exists between 
our own will and the world of values.
Section 19: A General View of the Connection 
between Historical Understanding, Ethics,  
and Art (the Ideal of Human Life)
1. The process of imaginative re- creation succeeds with phenomena 
that are based on commonality. The consciousness of this common-
ality originates in the re- creative processes of life and is developed 
by human intercourse and associations.
2. This commonality excludes inscrutability, alienation, unintelligi-
ble willfulness.
3. On this basis universal validity in aesthetics, logical necessity in 
thought, and solidarity in ethics are generated.
4. And associations do indeed cultivate, on the basis of mutual un-
derstanding and the sympathy inherent in it, and under the condi-
tions of the common group interests, the propagation of benevo-
lence extending from the tribe to the state, and finally to the whole 
of humanity. This community of interests finally allows the concept 
of general welfare to arise.
83
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
109
A new refutation of utilitarianism: We can now see that utilitari-
anism reverses the actual state of affairs. In utilitarianism, the com-
plex, eventual product, namely, the tendency to bring about general 
welfare, is put first. It then derives from welfare the general facts 
contained within it.
On the other hand, on the basis of imaginative re- creative pro-
cesses, a higher life is introduced, assuming that it proceeds to in-
crease intelligibility. All imaginative products serve to form a sphere 
of higher mental life.
Section 20: Application to Education as One of 
the Main Aspects of Moral Development
This shows that ideality is altogether the result of processes of 
imaginative re- creation: and, to be sure, those processes that are 
especially favorable to emulating higher human nature.
 Emulation occurs initially through social relations. Personal role 
models are important for the upbringing of every human being. Fa-
thers and teachers should be role models. [Consider] the formative 
power of great contemporary individuals and the enormous influ-
ence of their examples, as well as great individuals from the past 
and the human feelings in poetry that [build] human culture. <The 
natural sciences cannot shape a person, who on the basis of sympa-
thy, benevolence, [and] a comprehensive outlook, can achieve some-
thing in political life, in social organizations, in society. Clarity of 
intellect is cultivated in relation to nature, but the development of 
the highest moral characteristics is firmly connected with exposure 
to the greatest figures of literature and history. The simple greatness 
of classical authors cannot be replaced. [If] Homer, Plato and their 
ideals were to be replaced by Newton, Voltaire, and Diderot, then 
the core of education, the value of re- creating what is important, 
would disappear.>
Section 21: The Variety of Ethical Dispositions 
or the Ethical Organization of Human Life
1. Ethical dispositions can no more be reduced to a determinate 
number than can the categories of thought. Even a fixed differenti-
ation among them turns out to be impossible. This is the same state 
of affairs that can be established about the elementary processes of 
intelligence and the categories that derive from them. Sensory ca-
pacities behave the same way. All this has to do with a fundamental 
84
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
110 
I
characteristic of mental life that everywhere poses difficulties for 
scientific research. Variations and transformations are generated by 
altered circumstances and conditions, etc.
2. We cannot even sharply separate ethical dispositions from other 
basic features of the will. The nature of each mental disposition de-
rives from the fact that certain volitions or regular volitional char-
acteristics tend to recur. This is conditioned in many cases by the 
way that a certain form of volition is connected with a pleasant state 
of feeling. Cowardice and courage are equally evoked in the course 
of life, but we can designate courage as an ethical disposition. Since 
courage is connected with the intensification of the feeling of life, it 
generates the tendency to prefer it. But such dispositional tenden-
cies cannot always be directly designated as ethical; habit is also 
a function of practice that [is] favorable to mental life. Likewise, the 
tendency to subordinate isolated volitions to those that contain a 
rule. It cannot be determined whether those dispositions that lead 
to an ethical life should be considered as already ethical; still less 
can their number be established.
3. The Various Dispositions. An Overview: a) The natural cycle [by 
which] feelings turn into actions. b) Habituation as an ethical force, 
custom, habit, etc. c) Beyond the changes of our desires and their 
fulfillment, there is the attitude that does not change and always 
operates in accordance with a rule. d) The right relation between 
need and the means to satisfaction. When we cannot adapt to what 
is actual through our actions, we have to do it through feeling in an 
internal way. Here lies the source of religion. This relation, too, by 
which humans internally adjust when denied adaptation to external 
objects, is an ethical disposition.
4. We can no more designate these dispositions as primitive than 
we can classify them. But if we view them synoptically, they offer 
a certain metaphysical interpretation. This fact is important for the 
cultivation of religion. They converge, to produce a metaphysical 
relation, according to which persons are mutually bound together 
in an ethical realm of persons.
85
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THREE
The Evolution of the Ethical and the Principles  
of a Social Ethics
1: We Have Developed Ethical Dispositions:  
How Do They Change?
Section 1: The Relation between Ethical 
Dispositions and Ethical Constellations  
of Power within Society
Introduction
In the great forms or forces that operate everywhere in society, namely, 
self- development, work, property, companionship, and marriage, 
utilitarianism sees only parts of a machine that have the effect of 
producing general welfare. [Utilitarianism relates these forms] to 
what is ethical as means to an end. Society is [conceived as] a machine 
whose construction requires incredible insight.
By contrast to this conception, I propose the following: These 
forces or forms of society originate from drives and ethical disposi-
tions of the individual person in societal association. Their tendency 
toward the general welfare originates from particular relationships 
among volitional processes and states of feelings. As a system of 
movement arises from the cooperation of forces, so a total social 
sphere of feelings emerges as society evolves.
1. Strivings and feelings merge in society. All of the volitional striv-
ings that occur in society produce a system of experiential states 
whose intensity is subject to decrease or increase. Thus, one can call 
them feelings, but they are qualitatively quite diverse. The tension 
of the will when it feels bound by duty, and the peace of having 
86
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
112 
I
fulfilled one’s duty, have little similarity with the course of sensual 
desires and sensual pleasure.
2. General welfare can thus be designated as the goal of these voli-
tional strivings in society.
3.  The satisfaction of drives affords a temporary contentment, but 
the states of mind connected to ethical dispositions contain per-
manent satisfaction. Thus, only when individuals and society give 
a priority to ethical dispositions can there be permanent content-
ment. When a society increasingly facilitates the satisfaction of 
drives within certain bounds, and makes this a self- evident presup-
position, then it opens up the possibility of acquiring permanent 
contentment through the development of ethical dispositions. In 
comparison with exalted moral principles, these are modest and 
prosaic considerations, but they correspond to the reality of things.
4. 1. . . Needs and their satisfaction possess an all- compelling power 
only within the range in which they are required for self- preservation. 
Otherwise they are isolated, transitory, leave behind satiety and bore-
dom. At the same time, they will come into conflict with the higher 
characteristics of the will if the latter are not taken into account. 
What is the overall end of this life? This is the ultimate question from 
this animalistic standpoint. But a permanent contentment is brought 
about through the development of the inherent disposition of strivings 
and strong, joyful emotions that are always ready to expend energy 
to cooperate without friction in solidarity with one’s fellow creatures.
Thus, the great principle of active life takes shape: joy in the 
exertion of will and its activation through a solidarity of interests.
From these dispositions, then, there emerge through evolution, 
the forces and forms of social life. When I speak of force in relation 
to the social sciences, I include a connection of some kind of psycho-
logical state of affairs with a feeling that mediates the transition to 
action. The strivings of someone who is hungry is such a force. The 
raised level of feeling in the attestation of courage is such a force. 
This force is present whenever a state of affairs is connected with a 
feeling that guides the will. All ethical dispositions are forces; they 
combine with drives into mass forces and specific constellations.
1 The first brief paragraphs of this subsection are not translated here because 
they are repeated in an expanded form on the next page of the German text, which 
will be translated in its entirety.
87
88
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
113
Section 2: Societal Forces
Main thesis: The evolution of society takes place through the in-
teraction of individual forces amidst a milieu. As these consist of 
drives, feelings, [and] ethical dispositions, societal evolution is to be 
derived from their interaction.
First, I will consider particular forces that regularly recur and 
operate together in societal life. Hunger, the sex drive, habit, and the 
consciousness of kindred relations are such forces.
We do not assert that these are primary; it is enough that they 
are irreducible and cannot be derived from the bare abstractions of 
benevolence or other partial facts such as compassion. Compassion 
is only the shared experience of a single condition, but shared ex-
perience extends further. Carlyle smoking quietly with his mother 
in a courtyard offers a serene image of silent understanding as the 
highest form of communion. So is the seeming boredom of mar-
ried life.
These properties have the tendency to further human welfare be-
cause they are the formative aspects of social life. The development 
of well- being is a function of the development of society itself. The 
evolution of moral life only occurs on the basis of social evolution 
in general.
What is ethical cannot be determined a priori. Nor can it be 
derived from a few ethical processes. We must examine moral evo-
lution, and the results will differ widely from epoch to epoch. Those 
agencies that make it possible to have enduring satisfaction and 
more refined states of feeling warrant our initial designation as eth-
ical forces. What is ethical or goodness itself is initially what evolu-
tion makes of these forces.
These regularly recurring single forces generate larger, second- 
order societal forces, and indeed the coordination of several of them 
produces a higher whole. Such wholes are coordinative social forms.
I maintain that the great, real forces or forms of socio- historical 
life cannot be derived from utility but arise from vital moral dispo-
sitions. Work as a constitutive principle of society, individual devel-
opment, property, fellowship, the nature of the family, and the ideal 
of fellowship are all rooted in these vital moral dispositions.
1. Work is a steady and enduring exertion of will. [There is a] 
problem of deriving forms from the exertion of will. [Work] car-
ries a satisfaction in itself. Whereas the satisfaction of drives is 
quickly extinguished, [that from work] can bring about continued 
satisfaction.
89
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
114 
I
2. Work is the basis of all societal achievements. “Achievement on 
the basis of what we are” is an empty phrase. Lasting satisfaction 
and control of the passions is connected to work. From this [comes] 
the norm of modern ethical life: As all enjoyment derives from one’s 
own work and the work of others and as no one is permitted to 
use others merely as means because all human beings are of equal 
value, the expectation of greater enjoyment in life comes with the 
duty to work harder. It is the task of society to make this postulate 
compelling.
3. Individual development is the necessary form in which persons 
satisfy their drives, form a core of lasting satisfaction through the 
exertion of force, and attain an independence or autonomy relative 
to externally operating sources of pleasure and displeasure. With 
this we can establish the norm that the organization of society must 
make possible an individual development for all. Slave labor cannot 
be permitted. Each worker will be a member of society.
4. An immediate, volitional life- manifestation that inheres in the 
will and gives it form, is property, extending over the products of 
work. It [exists] simply in the continuity of the will in bringing 
about a result. And what is acquired through accumulation is prop-
erty that also includes the means of labor. All inheritance law can be 
justified only if the will expending itself in work is allowed to inhere 
in its products even beyond death. Whence, the norm: The will finds 
satisfaction only in controlling the products accumulated by work. 
If this [control] were abolished, [the will] would be hampered. If 
property were theft2 and everything were [held] in common, then 
the strong, industrious will would create secretive property through 
theft. The enslaved will is in the long run more unbearable than 
any other evil, because it affects everyone equally. The tendency in 
society to ordinarily allow needs to be satisfied leads to increasing 
control over nature. What exceeds need becomes the sphere of the 
will as free activity and extends to others in the associations of life.
5. Every kind of fellowship expresses the need for kinship, commu-
nity, etc. The basic form is found in the consanguinity of the tribe 
or the clan.
2 Cf. Pierre- Joseph Proudhon, What Is Property? trans. B. Tucker (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1876).
90
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
115
6. Marriage and family offer a developing form of working com-
munity that we do not think can be surpassed. Marriage actualizes 
the ideal of completely overcoming alienation. This could only be 
tied to the sexual union and common children. This [is] the greatest 
mystery of the world.
Utilitarianism assumes that general welfare is the goal. Then 
marriage, property, etc., are derived from this goal— not from living 
impulses, but rather from a calculating reason that juggles means 
and ends. This outlook is a correlate of the mechanical [world pic-
ture.] It can provide a mechanical concatenation of means, but it 
can never actually account for what characterizes the realm of the 
will.
Section 3: The Evolution of Ethical Life
1. There is no tendency, operative at all times, to generate public 
well- being. There are no everlasting commands of conscience or 
ethical judgments. Drives, a constant causal conditioning of feel-
ings, [and] higher characteristics of the will interact at a primitive 
cultural level. The picture that arises from this requires imaginative 
completion; however, so- called primitive peoples give us at least an 
analogue. Here we typically find a mixture of crude drives, individ-
ual ethical dispositions, and degenerate dispositions in the life of 
human impulses.
Letourneau, president of the Anthropological Society in Paris 
and professor of anthropology there, has provided a comprehensive 
collection in his book on the evolution of morals.3 His result is that 
general, inherited moral precepts are nowhere to be found at the 
lowest level of civilization. He finds cannibalism, infanticide, slav-
ery, killing of the elderly, the treatment of women as mere domestic 
animals, sexual transgressions of all kinds. Potentates display an ut-
ter absence of humanity in many cases. A traveler in Africa narrates 
about the well- known king Mutesa of Uganda: A female offered 
him a freshly plucked fruit. Red with anger, the king declared that 
it was the first time a woman had dared to offer him anything. He 
had her cut to pieces.
2. Concerning the life of the drives, one sees some of the main 
points where the savages lack moral feelings, and how these feelings 
3 Charles Jean Marie Letourneau (1831– 1902), L’evolution de la morale (Paris, 
1887).
91
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
116 
I
gradually become more accessible. Infanticide survives in abortion; 
sexual promiscuity in prostitution; slavery and cannibalism in the 
treatment of the lower classes. The fear of potentates and their exor-
bitant life of pleasure survives in monarchical social spheres and the 
preponderance of religious prohibitions over ethical impulses and 
the power of superstition survives in ecclesiastical societies and in 
trials about witchcraft, etc.
3. Human strivings involve a principle of development that can be 
ascertained in the individual as well as in society. Negatively put, 
we can say that the content of the drives does not provide sufficient 
ground for the development of humanity that takes place in soci-
ety. This could only lead to an increase in the means of satisfying 
drives. And if one adds sympathy, there arises an auxiliary realm of 
concern for others.
But from the inherent dispositions of the will—whose most im-
portant elements we have analyzed— there emerge a few apprecia-
ble, yet permanent, effects that add up and result in an elevation 
of the overall ethical status of humanity. Already Hume says that 
human evolution is ultimately based not on strong incentives, but 
on scarcely noticeable, delicate, ever- recurring ones. Herein lies the 
explanation for why moral incentives are partially sought in reason.
Positively put, we can see that the boundless tendency toward 
the means of enjoyment produces an aggregation that allows the 
intellect to establish techniques for dominating nature. Thus, in 
society there emerges a gradual unburdening of the will with re-
gard to the satisfaction of drives. We call progress in civilization the 
process by which this satisfaction, on the one hand, becomes ever 
more comprehensive, the utilization of constant sources of pleasant 
feelings becomes ever more all- embracing, while at the same time 
this demands ever less of an expenditure of labor. At first, this un-
burdens the upper classes; subsequently, the lower classes are given 
more time free from manual labor. Similarly, ever more processes in 
biological development can dispense with an attentive exertion of 
the will.
According to a fundamental law of the will, volitional strivings 
that are often repeated lead to habituation. Thus, habit, tradition, 
[and] custom are produced in the individual and in society. When-
ever uniformities are assimilated by consciousness, rules of action 
arise. They contribute significantly to moral evolution. The more 
we rely on constant and habitual practices or raise ourselves to 
[the level of] a rule, the more we unburden the will. It continues 
92
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
117
to operate unobtrusively in habit or rule, instead of by perpetual 
interventions.
3. The activities of the will that I have designated as ethical dis-
positions can now freely unfold. The development of the individual, 
love and concern for human association, and devotion to the goals 
of culture take the place of an irregular satisfaction of passions.
4. This evolution is, however, constantly disturbed by the expan-
siveness of the drives and passions. Luxury, a craving for pleasure, 
[and] desires to dominate grow with the advance of civilization. 
Therefore, the history of society exhibits the need for great moral 
or religious transformations of the will. Here we go beyond mere 
evolution. There are also more profound processes that occur in 
the collective will and disrupt the course of evolution by means of 
catastrophes.
5. But despite such catastrophes we can see the durability of forms 
and products that have come into existence— associations, institu-
tions, cultural or spiritual creations, etc.
Section 4: Primitive Human Beings, Their Milieu, 
and the Evolution of Society
Society develops through the cooperation of external factors and 
the milieu in which human beings live with the inner tendencies 
found in human nature. We see how an animal species increases 
or decreases the number of its members, remains stationary or mi-
grates according to its relation to external circumstances. Every ag-
gregate of human beings behaves in the same way. And indeed such 
a human aggregate is affected by the climate, the configuration of 
geographical terrains, flora and fauna. Operating as internal factors 
are characteristics of the body, the senses and intelligence, feelings, 
drives, and will.
As concerns the body, primitive people exhibit meager develop-
ment of their lower extremities, considerable bulk in the jawbones 
and teeth and in the digestive organs. Primitive people are less ca-
pable than civilized people in expending a large amount of power 
throughout a long period of time; this is conditioned by inferior 
nutrition and the proportionately smaller scope of their nervous 
system. But primitive people show a greater capability of endur-
ing harmful influences, and a greater indifference with regard to 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
118 
I
unpleasant or painful sensations. To the degree that the brain is less 
developed, puberty begins earlier. Their affects are not regulated 
by a relationship over a long interval of time and systematic plan-
ning in their satisfaction; they are capricious, moved by momentary 
impulses, incapable of regular activity and persistent work whose 
gratification lies in the future. They exhibit a childlike cheerfulness 
that is not darkened by any thoughts about what is to come; they 
give themselves entirely to freedom in their life- manifestations 
and affective activity. Their wish and desire for approval is so great 
that they quietly endure the pains that accompany the expansion of 
their lower lip by a piece of wood, the piercing of their cheeks to 
hang and display precious stones, and the insertion of quills in their 
nasal septum. Though having a firm love for children, the Fuegians 
sell their children as slaves, and the inhabitants of New Guinea 
will barter away a child to a merchant for a trifle that they happen 
to need.
On the other hand, one finds in them already a large element 
of good- naturedness. The course from desire to enjoyment is not 
inhibited by good breeding. The drives are not subordinated to sys-
tematic planning by the will, nor are habitual work practices culti-
vated. Their intellectual characteristics manifest themselves in acute 
senses and the inclination to imitate. They are incapable of going 
beyond the concrete. They lack interest in the new and are amazed 
by nothing. Their sluggish memory and imitative nature betray a 
treadmill- like attitude. Their intellect develops more quickly and 
reaches its limits earlier.
Section 5: The Development of Ethical 
Consciousness in Associations— Authority  
and Duty
1. According to recent research, the earliest association is not the 
family, but rather the tribe, the clan. Even today, with many prim-
itive peoples, the family lags behind the clan association in social 
significance. In many cases there is no definite designation for the 
act of contracting a marriage. Religious ceremonies accompanying 
the act of marriage are of a relatively later time. And yet native 
peoples attach religious ceremonies to such decisive life- acts as the 
declaration of manhood and adoption.
2. Primitive conceptions of marriage diverge. The one is matriarchal, 
the other patriarchal. The first is rooted in the idea of consanguinity. 
93
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
119
The child descends from the mother. In the free life of hunters and 
fishermen, the bond between father and son is loose. The strong 
bond is with the mother. Thus matriarchal law results. Polyandry 
is also compatible with such a basic legal conception, and it can 
emerge as a consequence of the deficiencies of females. Matriarchy 
results in the principle of maternal hereditary succession. The child 
is not heir to the father, but rather to the brother of the woman, the 
uncle. Patriarchy is not rooted in consanguinity, but rather in prop-
erty. The man extends his authority also over wife and children. 
Now the family develops on the basis of patriarchal sovereignty 
and plays a prominent role in the evolution of ethical dispositions.
Section 6: Custom, Justice, and Ethical Law
A custom arises when the ethical dispositions already discussed de-
velop in the context of these early forms of association. Two char-
acteristics of the will are especially effective here. Volitional striv-
ings attain a certain uniformity within an association, and through 
practice and habituation some of them are handed down from gen-
eration to generation. The will submits to the concept of habit. By 
this we mean each mode of behavior that has become steady and 
unchangeable through practice. It can rule the individual in his ac-
tion. When common duties are accepted in a community a general 
practice comes about. Such a practice becomes custom insofar as it 
functions as a rule or norm in a community.
Custom is somewhat like instinct. Instinct involves the trans-
formation of conscious movements into an impulsive mechanism 
by means of habit. The consciousness of motives is preserved in a 
custom, and the habitual volitional practice that arises in a commu-
nity remains animated by these motives. Nevertheless, Ihering4 has 
called attention to a peculiar transformation of purposes even while 
a habitual practice maintains itself. The process is analogous to that 
of changes in the meanings of words. The external habits of life 
persist, and after their purpose has disappeared, another purpose is 
inserted. Thus, the funeral banquet, which was originally part of the 
worship of the dead, has been maintained and still continues today 
for other practical reasons. The custom of drinking a toast to some-
one goes back to the ritual of sacrificing wine to a god. Drinking 
4 Rudolf von Ihering (or Jhering) (1818– 1892), German legal scholar, consid-
ered the founder of sociological jurisprudence; author of Geist des römischen Rechts 
and Der Zweck im Recht, among other works.
94
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
120 
I
blood reduces to drinking out of a so- called blood cup merely as a 
symbol of brotherhood or friendship. Similarly, the custom of giv-
ing a tip for services refers back to an originally tendered drink of 
which today there is no longer any memory.
A custom is kept intact not only by habitual practice, but even 
more by the judgment of peers about deviations from it. Thus de-
viations from customs can be punished in ways that impact us as 
grievously as legal punishment. The means of internal coercion of 
customs can be just as strong as the external ones of laws.
Section 7: Religion, the Ideal, and the 
Acceptance of Duty and Law in an  
Overall Context
In the earliest times accessible to us, science, poetry, and belief in 
primitive animistic ideas and the myths attached to them, are in-
terrelated. Irreligious peoples seem not to exist. At first, primitive 
conceptions are the starting point for cults and ceremonies that are 
connected to self- preservation and have no relation to ethical life. 
But ancestral cults and sacrificial offerings manifest features that 
enter into relation with the ethical dispositions discussed earlier.
The respectful remembrance of ancestors is a feature that is sel-
dom lacking even in primitive peoples, and it everywhere easily 
combines with those influences that are otherwise exercised by our 
feelings and wishes for the memory of a past forever removed from 
perception. The weaknesses and deficiencies of the dead are for-
gotten, and their virtues magnified, in accordance with the saying 
“De mortuis nihil nisi bene” [Of the dead nothing but good is to be 
said”] whose validity is preserved for all levels of existence. But in 
primitive peoples this feature of reverence gains its imposing influ-
ence on their state of mind, above all by means of imagery about the 
afterlife of the dead. The soul that gives up the breath of life is often 
thought of as a shadow or as an ephemeral image of the person 
that remains for a longer or shorter time at the scene of its earthly 
deeds. Or when it leaves that place in order to enter a special realm 
of the dead, it nevertheless— for as long as the remembrance of the 
deceased survives at all— stays in touch with the living and shares 
with them its pain and joy. The dream and vision that the native 
child regards as a lived actuality serves to renew this exchange [with 
the deceased] in case it threatens to break off.
The mysterious coming and vanishing of such visions— indeed, 
even the dread that the sight of the dead evokes— produce an 
95
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
121
easy relation between it and another chain of representations. 
That which is mysterious at the same time passes for magical. 
Happiness and unhappiness are traced back to the demonic be-
ings surrounding us, and spirits of the dead are allowed to insert 
themselves, as the assumption suggests itself that they participate 
in the destinies of those left behind. Soon it happens [that] they 
assist the living with their advice, give them good ideas, and like 
other demons that bring fortune or misfortune, they actively and 
directly intervene in their destiny. It is not unusual therefore for 
souls to also differentiate themselves into good and bad demons, 
and for the brave and the praiseworthy to live on as charitable 
spirits while the profligate and criminal survive as ghosts dispens-
ing harm.
It may be that the ethical drive that is placed in and for itself in the 
idealized memory of ancestors is impaired and at times completely 
suppressed by being mixed with notions of ghosts and magic. But 
here it is not to be forgotten that, on the other hand, the very mo-
tives that excite hope or fear in humans are in a position to exert an 
enduring influence. When the idealizing reverence for forefathers is 
no longer completely disinterested— when they are at the same time 
invoked as protective and feared as vengeful spirits, then indeed the 
ethical influence that exercises the personal characteristics ascribed 
to ancestors in memory does not need to disappear. In fact, there 
is enough evidence available to demonstrate more specifically that 
this influence operates in two directions.
First of all, it is the personal example that arouses emulation. If 
the tendency to idealize the characteristics of an ancestor in mem-
ory is already an ethical moment in and for itself, then the notion 
created by this drive has an effect similar to that of the living actu-
ality for which it is retained. The deceased person is a better ethical 
role- model than any living person could be, because the imagina-
tion furnishes its imagery with good qualities either without any 
limitations or with only those limitations that the conditions of 
actual life always bring with them. By nature, humans never have 
absolute perfection, but when we imagine an ideal, we can always 
only put greater stress on the characteristics that are regarded as 
admirable and set aside those that strike us as odious. However defi-
cient this ideal may be, there is, in the influence it exerts, the tendency 
toward its own perfection, and thus the possibility for an unlimited 
development.
Secondly, the idealizing light that diffuses over past generations 
in reverent remembrance has an effect back on the present. An old 
96
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
122 
I
man in the twilight of his life already draws some of the veneration 
that will be bestowed on him after his death. The worship of the 
dead, originally deriving from the natural feeling of piety, operates 
under the coloring that religion confers on this feeling, retroactively 
strengthening its intensity. Through the veneration of living parents, 
of old age, and of fellow tribesmen who stand out for their praise-
worthy characteristics or their rank— affects are aroused that seem 
to be related to that of religious commitment.
This is an example of the general process by which peoples in 
progressive civilizations transform primitive ideas about forefathers 
or ancestors, heroes, or gods into a conception of an ideal, mentally 
satisfying existence.
Thus, ideals representing heroes or gods originate within reli-
gious processes on the basis of an ethical view. One such ideal of 
the Greeks is Heracles:
He is the working, suffering hero, harassed by labours and 
persecutions, yet bravely persevering in the midst of all mis-
fortunes, and finally receiving the reward of virtue in his ele-
vation to the rank of a god. His myth thus reflects a view of 
life that takes the world and its tasks seriously enough, but 
still, on the whole, looks cheerfully and hopefully to the end. 
Heracles is not miserable under his burdens, does not break 
down, when left without divine assistance, under the load upon 
his shoulders: he is a mighty man of valour, who helps himself 
by his strength and endurance.5
Thus, natural religions are moralized by means of our ethical dis-
positions. Ideals first arise within these natural religions. Only later 
will ideals be further developed in the poetry that is inspired by 
religion. The ethical ideal then becomes one of the strongest powers 
of the world of human conduct.
In the same way, we find imagery about life after death con-
nected with the natural religions. A special land of the dead, an 
island of the departed, and resting places in the luminous vaults of 
heaven are envisioned. Only later do we see the Greeks add to this 
the idea of retribution.
Furthermore, notions about the gods lead to the idea of ethical 
commands. Just as deities stand in a relationship to human beings 
5 Wilhelm Wundt, Ethics: An Investigation of the Facts and Laws of the Moral 
Life, Vol. I, 94, trans. Edward Bradford Titchener, Julia Henrietta Gulliver, and Mar-
garet Floy Washburn (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1897).
97
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
123
that make sacrifices to them, and the cult of worship involves a duty 
to them to which advantages attach, so the concepts of authority 
and lawgiver extend themselves to our ethical conceptions.
Natural religions stand at the beginning of human development, 
but in the further course of culture we see the emergence of reli-
gions in which a nation collects and concentrates the achievements 
of its ethical culture. The greatest of these are the teachings of Con-
fucius, Buddha, Christianity, and Islam. They place an ethical ideal 
at the heart of religion and give it a dominating force in a wide 
cultural sphere.
The Concept of an Ideal
An ideal involves an expansion of the will that is not conditioned 
by obligation, but rather has the character of the free actualization 
of an image of higher perfection.
Motivations
1. The human imagination and aesthetic powers manifest an ideal-
izing tendency. Even masks and caricatures serve to intensify.
2. The idealization of the will originates in the volitional relations 
of parents and children, of leaders to a clan, and the veneration 
of parents and ancestors.
3. Insofar as these . . . 6 recede, rudiments of a notion of an ideal 
order emerge: Heroes become ideal shapes. The ideal acquires 
consistency only in an ideal ordering of things.
Section 8: The Concept of the  
Ethical— Good and Evil
Initially the expressions “good,” “evil,” “bad,” and “virtue,” desig-
nate the presence of characteristics required for human tasks. This 
reference to the purposeful content of human life is preserved even 
when these concepts are spiritualized. According to the enduring 
and everywhere similar, albeit remote, effects of such characteris-
tics, the form of the will attains an unconditional value independent 
from its particular and immediate consequences.
6 The portion of this sentence indicated by ellipsis is illegible in the original 
manuscript. (H).
98
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
124 
I
Society provides judicial laws and ethical norms, and designates 
certain characteristics as virtues, and value- judgments of “good” 
and “evil.” Ethical reflection about inner experience seems unable 
to determine universally valid marks that distinguish these con-
cepts. What does “good” or “bad” mean? A good knife or a bad 
pair of boots have no merit or defect apart from the need that they 
serve. Thus, we also understand initially good human beings to be 
those who possesses the attributes requisite for fulfilling their func-
tions, and we designate as virtues those attributes— truthfulness, 
integrity, etc.— that are unconditionally necessary for [executing] 
any human function. In good human beings they are connected 
to their ability to perform. Thus, the incisive viewpoint always re-
gards as good, virtuous, or ethical those attributes that constantly 
and universally correspond to a functional task that life presents 
to the individual. This is also confirmed linguistically. The word 
“good” has the meaning of “appropriate.” The Greek word agathos 
denotes suitability— as well as heritage as a guarantee of such he-
reditary attributes. The substantive arete denotes any characteristic 
that gives a person or thing eminent worth. The German word for 
virtue (Tugend) is still associated with suitability (Tauglichkeit) for 
modern understanding. The Roman virtus stresses— as is typical 
of the Romans— masculinity. In the course of time, these words, 
then, acquire a deeper internalized meaning. We notice the same 
progression with more specialized terms of ethical nomenclature. 
The words “just” and “rightful” (rectus, gerecht) designate some-
one who proceeds on a straight path. The word “pious” (fromm) 
is related to the verb “to be of use” (frommen), referring again to 
what is useful.
This process of internalization finally detaches good, evil, and 
virtue from the relation to a purpose to be realized and uses them 
instead to designate a form of willing. We can readily find a basis 
for this in the natural progression of ethical consciousness. In the 
course of action, judgment increasingly takes into consideration, 
not only immediate effects, but also those that are mediate and 
spread to the wider spheres of society. Thus, evaluation becomes 
detached from the nature of the nearest consequences. Truthfulness 
is required of us, even where it results in a direct disadvantage for 
others, because the whole stability of a more noble form of soci-
ety is based on trust. Saint Crispin7 made shoes for the poor out of 
stolen leather. We do not evaluate this action primarily in terms of 
7 Saint Crispin was a third- century Roman martyr.
99
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
125
immediate consequences, according to which the damage to rich 
leather dealers was small compared with the usefulness to poor 
people. Although we recognize a disposition toward the well- being 
of others that risks the gallows, it is more important to condemn 
a type of action and way of thinking that is disadvantageous for 
the property relations of society. Thus, the valuation of a type of 
action is detached from consideration of its specific consequences 
but remains focused on an assessment of consequences at large. At 
the same time, the judgment that is formed in the social whole ab-
stracts more and more from the particularity of the individual case 
and puts stress on the lasting effects of a type of action or character 
trait for all cases in general.
The method of social ethics confirms this. There are ways of act-
ing and character traits that are well suited to holding society to-
gether: They insure the satisfaction of the individual; they promote 
the control of society over nature; they promote unity, harmony, 
and a close cooperation of individuals in society as a whole. We 
designate such character traits or ways of acting as virtuous, good, 
and ethical. These evaluations of conscience can always be tested in 
relation to the tasks of human life. This is strong evidence for the 
link between conscience and the factual tasks of human life. Thus, 
all morality ultimately searches for the motives that bring about 
the fulfillment of the functions of life in society, toward their sanc-
tions, toward their development with the greatest possible energy. 
The concept of a life- task is concretely fulfilled in human ethical 
consciousness. Its scientific illumination establishes the whole foun-
dation of healthy ethical reflection.
However, before we dig a foundation underground, we need 
to draft a building plan. We must make clear what is supposed to 
stand above ground.
Section 9: The Universal and the Constantly 
Effective Incentives of Ethical Life
There is also agreement that certain incentives have a uniform eth-
ical effect in any state of a society, i.e., affect the fulfillment of the 
functions of life in society.
The shaping of life in society that corresponds to the func-
tions of life is achieved by a series of incentives; these are conse-
quently designated as ethical or moral. The German expression 
for “ethical” (sittlich) is a translation of moralis, for still in Mid-
dle High German the former is used like our word for “modest” 
100
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
126 
I
or “chaste” (sittig) to denote “conformity with custom” (Sitte). The 
Latin expression moralis, however, is expressly claimed by Cicero 
to simulate the Greek word ethicos.8 But the latter term is intro-
duced by Aristotle in order to distinguish the virtues of character 
as ethical rather than dianoetic or intellectual. Here for Aristotle, 
the leading idea, as he himself stresses, is the close relationship 
between ethos and ήθος. Both expressions in fact hang together 
etymologically. Thus, the connection of customary ethos and eth-
ics is basic in the nomenclatures of the three languages; however, 
it is not determined by a predominantly instinctive consciousness, 
but rather by disciplinary thought and the deliberate formation 
of language.
Instead of isolating one overarching abstract mark of ethical in-
centives, we will gather the incentives by means of the empirical and 
indubitable characteristics that have been used over the ages.
1. Every striving for personal excellence and the satisfaction con-
nected with it, as well as for outward recognition, is naturally 
viewed by average people as ethical or moral. The preservation, 
intensification, energetic, and powerful activation of life are always 
valued as constituents of an excellent life. The mere caricature and 
distortion of this motivation is contained in the ethical principle of 
pleasure. If one isolates this incentive, it immediately proves itself 
inadequate to account for what gives social life its cohesiveness. 
The Cyrenaics who focused on pleasure in life— both the striving 
for pleasure and the escape from displeasure— fall victim to Aristo-
tle’s pertinent critique that pleasure is merely the sign of successful 
dealings in a healthy life. In a biological context, instinctive drives 
are there before the experience of pleasure, which their satisfaction 
brings about. Inner experience teaches that the poet writes his verse 
based on an inner drive, not because of the pleasure that ensues; the 
hunter and soldier would rather endure hunger and thirst, receive 
wounds, strive, and prevail than accumulate pleasurable sensations 
in an idle life. In short, better to be a dissatisfied human being than 
a satisfied pig.
2. The Incentives of Sympathy, of Benevolence, of Love. Just as we 
see animals living in herds, we humans are instinctively governed by 
a drive for sociability. That this is a moral incentive is already stated 
8 Cicero, De Fato.
101
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
127
in the following passage from Goethe’s Faust: “The worst company 
will make you feel that you are a man among men.”9
Cicero, and after him Grotius, demonstrate that the life of the 
state is grounded on the drive for sociability. This feeling of socia-
bility is akin to fellow- feeling and sympathy. What their common 
root is we will not yet investigate here. In the feeling of fellowship 
someone else’s condition evokes in me a distinctive but weaker re-
flex: It is as though I could feel myself inside another mind. The 
life- condition of another person can uplift me; similarly, that of a 
social sphere can elevate my whole existence. In other cases, they 
can weigh me down. This fact about feelings is basic— an immedi-
ate given. Never has a more ill- fated psychological comparison been 
made than in Spinoza’s attempt, and similar attempts by others, to 
derive this fact from an inference or from a process of association. 
On the other hand, this feeling has long been viewed as an ethical 
mainspring of the first order, but resolute moralists like Kant have 
undermined this. It is true that the amount of pleasure in compas-
sionate feeling can make it morally doubtful.
Women who read about accidents in newspapers lament to-
gether at coffee socials. Their strong feelings are not always sources 
of active involvement. Kindheartedness is often found precisely in 
carefree persons, playboys; according to Goethe, it is well devel-
oped in prostitutes, and indeed [it is] close to an uninhibited in-
tent, even close to voluptuous cruelty. It is the dissipated weakness 
of feeling in a lack of character that allows such Kotzebuesque10 
tears to flow so frequently. Speculation about such feelings in po-
etry is the degeneracy of shallow, characterless poets. Therefore, 
Schopenhauer’s theory that compassion is the only ethical incen-
tive amounts to an animalization of ethics. On the other hand, 
sympathy is doubtless a strong ingredient in most forms of ethical 
feeling. Sympathy is an indigenous, basic element of veneration, 
thankfulness, and love. It is love that first achieves the expansion 
of existence beyond the sphere of one’s own self, and consequently 
the abolition of egoism.
With love, then, the sympathetic instinct, which may temporarily 
flare up, becomes a lasting state of consciousness, a form of the 
will, and accordingly a constantly burning flame warming the entire 
9 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, trans. Abraham Hayward (London: 
Hutchinson & Co., 1908), 48.
10 Reference to August von Kotzebue (1761– 1819), German playwright known 
for his sentimental plays.
102
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
128 
I
surroundings. From the moment that an egoistic, crude, and un-
kempt person has a child she can become completely engrossed in 
it as in a higher being. She lives for its sake, and thus motherly love 
can bring about a higher ethical development. But even this incen-
tive, as all- powerful as it is, does not suffice to shape the life of soci-
ety. The ethical significance of sympathy and love has been correctly 
recognized by Hutcheson, Hume, Adam Smith, and Schopenhauer, 
but no one can ever systematically derive the commitment to what 
is right and the sense of truthfulness from it.
3. The Feeling of Duty and Justice, the Consciousness of the Com-
mitment that Inheres in the Duty to Do What is Right or Just. 
This felt duty has its correlate in respect for others as ends in 
themselves. The incentive [of commitment that comes with this 
felt duty] constitutes the authentic backbone of the overall shap-
ing of social life. It operates, however, in various forms: in the 
commitment to what is right, in the lawfulness of action, in the 
binding force of the forms of justice independently of their exter-
nal enforceability.
This incentive [of commitment] cannot be conceived as a mere 
reflex in consciousness of the legal order operating through external 
coercion. Here we do not propose a theory about evolution and 
historical development. Viewed empirically, the individual’s fidelity 
to self or identity becomes an obligation as soon as it enters a re-
lation with another person or group of persons having self- worth 
and likewise a fidelity to self. Thus, a consciousness of commitment 
emerges, which ultimately has its basis in the fidelity to oneself and 
respect for the self- worth of others. But this is also the basis on 
which every political order of law is supported by an inner moral 
incentive that exceeds external coercion. Therefore, lawfulness also 
extends beyond the positive legal order. This virtue [of lawfulness] 
applies to property relations and all similar relations that arise 
among persons having self- worth either from express obligation or 
according to the nature of the matter. But the sense of what is right 
or just applies to any kind of commitment as such.
Consequently, natural law contains lasting truths. According 
to it, human beings possess a formative capacity for justice and 
right. This consists in the ability of a person to enter into and keep 
commitments on the basis of social relations with other persons 
possessing intrinsic worth and legal rights, each having a sphere 
at their disposal, even if only that of their own body. On this basis, 
103
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
129
the formation of right in every age is guided by one natural law, 
whereas the relations among persons having intrinsic worth and 
their achievements are historically grounded in a network of 
functions.
This incentive [of commitment] is the authentic mark of the tree 
of the social shaping of life. One can become a virtuous person 
without love, but not without lawfulness, which represents the true 
relation of these two incentives [of duty and right]. The efforts for 
the emancipation of women will always be held back by the fact 
that this incentive [of commitment] is not strong enough in them to 
produce political life. Women are meant to be under the guidance 
of the practical reason and the legal sense of men.
Kant’s formula— “act so that the maxim of your action can be 
conceived as universally valid”— conceals behind the form of logi-
cal universality the volitional relationship that each will possesses 
equal authority. I can only make demands and exert my will if I 
respect this same striving of the will in others. Just as I rely on the 
volitional commitments or promises of others, so I must observe 
them myself.
4. Supplementing these great incentives of all personal ethics that 
shape an ethical realm of persons, we find a more encompassing 
acknowledgment of self- sufficient values or goods produced by the 
work of history. These goods, and their specific effects, I refer to as 
cultural systems. This incentive of work and of personal devotion 
to the goods already and still to be produced by humanity emerges 
in consciousness as not dependent on the other incentives. Whatever 
genetic nexus exists, it is not part of our empirical considerations 
and classifications. According to the Platonic model, Schleiermacher 
and Hegel have laid down the principle of the realization of values 
inherent in practical reason, and in doing so they have provided an 
immortal service to social ethics. But it is not possible to use this 
principle, as they tried to do, to ground an ethical system that cor-
responds to life as a whole.
5. A further incentive lies in the interweaving of the individual into 
the associative bonds of the family, clan, state, and the feelings of 
dependence, dominance, fellowship, and submission conditioned by 
them. If ethical reflection is based on this, the ethics will be derived 
from a system of positive law and domination. This derivation will 
not succeed.
104
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
130 
I
6. Here, secondary, contributing factors emerge: a) Values are com-
bined in a purposive system and related to the meaning of life. In 
the rationalistic epoch of moral philosophy, these rational opera-
tions are often viewed as the primary ground of ethical determi-
nations. [Samuel] Clarke’s “fitness of things” or “aplitudo rerum” 
belongs to this tradition— the coordination of individual lives in a 
nexus of the values of things. Every being, every thing, should be 
regarded in relation to its position in the whole, just as one’s own 
behavior must be adapted to the nature of things. Expressions such 
as “nature” and “position in the whole” already contain the assess-
ments inherent in the immediate ethical incentives. b) The same is 
true for the aesthetic principle of joy in the ideal, of the complete 
shaping of existence.
Section 10: The Relation of Ethical Incentives in 
Culture and in the Ethos of Peoples and Ages
1. The concept of culture and cultural history: The cooperation of 
ethical incentives at a given state of society we designate as the 
ethical culture or ethos of an era. It forms the vital core of culture.
Every societal whole provides a structure and scaffolding for the 
interaction of the human life- units that constitute it.
2. The structural nexus of individuals is formed on the basis of a 
general biological one. In its simplest form, this involves an instan-
taneous reaction to a stimulus by means of movement. At higher 
stages, differentiations, combinations, interpolations become more 
prevalent. [Sensory] impressions are assimilated by human life- 
units, but since human beings are at their core a bundle of drives, 
these impressions are related to a system of drives and feelings. 
Thus, interests are aroused; thought processes are stimulated, as it 
were, and impressions are worked up into cognitions. This happens, 
however, in service to interests that attach themselves to [such im-
pressions]. Thus, every perception has, so to speak, an inner side— 
involving our drives, interests, and volitions— and can turn into a 
voluntary movement. This is also the case for every representation 
and every complex thought process. In psychic life, we find a defi-
nite progression from stimulus, drive, to voluntary movement in 
the individual parts as well as in the whole. A constant adaptation 
of life- units to their milieu occurs in this progression. Ideally, it pro-
duces a full life and the concomitant satisfaction through a system 
of drives and feelings.
105
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
131
We find this systematic unity on a larger social scale in what is 
called an epoch. We are used to designating the way an age thinks, 
lives, and acts, as its culture. Starting with these insights, we can 
now better define the concept of culture. It manifests the same inner 
coherence, the same concrete unity that is found in a person. This 
concrete unity that can emerge simultaneously in an individual and 
in a society, I call their culture. Accordingly, the distinctive feature 
of culture is to possess the vibrant unity of a person. The culture of 
a period can be regarded as the way that this structural system gives 
itself organs of enjoyment, productivity, and creativity.
The core of this structural nexus accordingly forms the focal 
point of the systems in which culture finds its vital coherence. Sci-
ence is the world of perception and thought. Ethics, religion, and art 
shape the life of the drives and feeling in society; social and techni-
cal processes push this into the external world. Let us now consider 
the way that ethical incentives are unified as the concrete whole of 
the ethos of a nation in a historical age.
Section 11: The Epochs of Moral Culture
The course of moral culture in the three generations of cultural 
peoples always exhibits initially a natural ethos that holds a society 
together; this process is gradually accompanied by the establish-
ment of moral ideals, norms, and, for the most part, principles as 
well. When the natural force of life in a national ethos is dimin-
ished and other natural aspirations are emancipated, then there 
arises in society an antagonism among the principles that claim to 
guide life. In ancient peoples we find the morality and natural law 
of the Sophists, the hedonism of the Cyrenaics and Epicureans, be-
ing resisted by conservative ethical systems. In the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, modern society established the natural sys-
tem of morality, right, and religion. In our century, as animalistic 
conceptions of human life that avail themselves of a foundation in 
the mechanical conception of nature and the evolutionary method 
are accompanied by the practice of utilitarianism, we also find a 
gradually developing theory that takes its departure from the will, 
the functions of life in society, and the historical consideration of 
moral life.
The moral culture of Eastern peoples, which is the first generation 
of cultural peoples accessible to us, was supported by a priestly hier-
archy; consequently, religion provided the main motivating incentive 
for holding together the social unity of the despotic social order. 
106
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
132 
I
Nothing more from this culture is still active with us, with the 
exception of the gradually fading doctrine of a special relation-
ship between the king and the deity. The divine right of kings and 
the hierarchic order of Catholicism are the last leftovers of this 
system.
The ethos of the Greeks that held their society together and the 
moral culture of the Romans during the early monarchical and aris-
tocratic period, seemed to be very akin to each other. The ruling 
class develops an extraordinary feeling for the state; this forms the 
dominating incentive for ethical consciousness. In the aristocracies 
of Sparta, Athens, and Rome, war and politics were the means of 
amassing power, enjoyment, and possessions. One must also learn 
to make a sober assessment of this heroic and aristocratic period. 
The divvying up of land, looting, and slaves are the result of every 
successful war. The concentrated power of the clan was one with 
the satisfaction of the personal egoism of its members. Especially 
in Sparta, the war- minded aristocrats are the landowners who hold 
a large area in submission. In Rome, successful wars are connected 
with expansions of territorial possessions , [and] of tax revenues 
for the spheres of municipal government. Moreover, religious incen-
tives emerge in ancient times to strengthen the feelings of political 
association: the phyles, phratries, [and] gens11 give a religious aura 
to these modes of kinship.
But in Greece as in Rome, the ethos of the period of greatness 
was destroyed by the advancing inequality of possessions, religious 
skepticism, craving for pleasure, etc. Human associations gave way 
to the upcoming industrialists, to a population enriched by trade. 
The philosophers in Greece sought in vain to hold off the decline 
by a philosophically grounded monotheism; still more futile were 
the religious and political attempts at restoration. The governmen-
tal mechanism of imperialism in Rome contained no real ethical 
bond.
Among more recent peoples, the militaristic spirit predominated 
in the same way until the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries when 
cities became powerful.
11 The phyle is the largest political subdivision of the Athenian state, with the 
phratry being a subdivision of this; gens refers to an ancient Roman kinship group-
ing based on a claim of kinship from a common male ancestor.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
133
 Section 12: The Principles of Ethics12
Proceeding on the assumption of unconditional judgments, ethics 
produces a cohesive system of precepts with a rigor equal to that of 
unconditional laws. On the model of ethical laws and conscience, 
this whole is conceived as a unity. As part of this unity, the prohi-
bition against theft and the injunction to cultivate oneself assert 
themselves with the same claim to establish an unconditional law. 
Indeed, in the most fully executed systems of this kind— above all, 
those of Fichte and Schleiermacher— the injunctions to respect prop-
erty and of shaping one’s individuality, being religious, and presenting 
oneself artistically appear side by side as distinct but parallel parts of 
a logically organized system. In short, the simplest commandments 
of conscience and the highest subtleties of moral culture appeal to 
our will with the same claim.
This fact of philosophic systems certainly does not confuse con-
science, even though Herbartians tend to see this as a threat. This is 
because conscience as it has so far developed never labors under the 
difficulties of theory, although it constantly profits from theoretical 
discoveries. The reason for this is that conscience is first and fore-
most a sentiment. When it is clarified to the point of a general law, it 
comes to share its overall indeterminacy, but all the while it retains 
an immediate certainty that reflection cannot disturb, even as it elu-
cidates it. Admittedly, however, these facts become confusing for 
theoretical inquiry. According to this philosophical ethical system, 
all possible refinements of the rational ideal should be regarded as 
absolutely obligatory. Otherwise, the simple injunctions of moral 
life will become mere ideals, losing their character of unconditional 
commitment. The quite different nature and power of moral judg-
ment in dealing with ideals and commitments, hovers over this kind 
of ethics as an unresolved question. That logical subordination is 
used to explain this real difference reveals the problem at hand all 
the more clearly.
The same discrepancy between the actual states of affair and 
traditional ethics appears when one examines the exceedingly im-
portant relation of the unconditional nature of moral precepts that 
resides in their form, and the changeability that emerges in their 
content. Here, too, the kind of ethics that recognizes the uncon-
ditional nature of moral precepts lays down a logically arranged 
12 This section of the lectures incorporates some pages from his earlier essay, 
“Versuch einer Analyse des moralischen Bewuβtseins,” GS VI, 24– 28.
107
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
134 
I
system of moral consciousness as necessary, and consequently ca-
pable of no alteration, at most of a progressive clarification. Over 
against this ethics there emerges a skepticism offended by this phan-
tasm of a total moral system, and with an eye toward history as 
suggesting the changeability of the moral judgments of man. Thus, 
it declares morality to be a historical result, to be the product of 
society, to be a power that surrounds us, whose right consists only 
in the fact that it is like the air that we need in order to breathe.
We find ourselves led to the same point again: A moral commit-
ment to a comprehensive system of ethics can be neither affirmed 
nor denied. That is, we can neither completely do away with such 
a commitment nor unconditionally assert it. Its negation is con-
tradicted by the moral feeling that is alive in us; its affirmation is 
contradicted by historical fact.
The contradictions of previous ethical systems insofar as they have 
promulgated unconditional moral judgments can only be resolved 
by taking a critical view of the assumption that an unconditional 
moral judgment or the ought of obligation involves a simple, uni-
form standard or measure. There is no simple, uniform ought ca-
pable of generating a system accompanied by the same simple and 
uniform obligation. On the contrary, great differences emerge in 
the nature of our obligations. This [differentiation] could be ascer-
tained from a sustained observation of the varying colorings in the 
way moral judgments manifest themselves. [This coloring effect] as a 
necessary assumption for getting rid of contradictions is, of course, 
a pure hypothesis.
Is such an assumption at all conceivable? Moral judgment, as we 
have recognized ever since Kant, is unconditional; it approves the 
good will for its own sake. There are synthetic- practical judgments 
a priori. These judgments appear in us as sentiments until they are 
clarified by general laws. Accordingly, something synthetic lies at the 
root of our moral consciousness. This synthesis can be conceived ei-
ther as a unity or as an unsurveyable multiplicity, but it can also be 
thought of as an articulated plurality consisting of different mem-
ber parts. Consequently, our moral, like our logical organization, 
exhibits itself as determinately articulated. Given these possibilities, 
a diversity of syntheses also leads us to expect a diversity in their 
forms.
In order to find support within our own inner life for the assump-
tion that solves the above difficulties, we go back into ourselves 
and attempt to survey the various forms of obligation as they result 
from these different syntheses.
108
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
135
1. The first form of obligation to consider is the sharply defined 
concept of commitment. It is not the moral ideal that sets the de-
mand here, but rather a will on the basis of a grounding mutual 
obligation or an acknowledged interrelationship. Relations of jus-
tice and law are first and foremost of this nature. But with further 
moral development, the nature of this ground goes far beyond that 
fixed by justice. The normal relation of a person to this sphere we 
designate as the commitment to what is right. Consequently, we 
regard as unconditionally binding only that which is a duty for us 
based on this fundamental synthesis of the commitment to what is 
right. Like the other forms of obligation, commitment is capable of 
unlimited extension in empirical situations. For everything in the 
moral world can be regarded from the standpoint of our relation-
ship to others as determined by mutual functions. Indeed, fidelity 
and consistency over against ourselves can have the character of 
obligation because our own will finds itself bound by claims estab-
lished by earlier acts. There exist characters for whom, due to the 
nature of their finely developed feeling of duty, all of their moral 
behavior falls essentially under the heading of being committed to 
what is right. From the standpoint of the sense of what is right or 
just, motives are regarded as a form of absolute commitment ren-
dering its actions as obligations. As such, the commitment to what 
is right involves a being indebted and bound by certain actions in 
advance.
2. Of a quite different nature is the form of the “ought” in which 
benevolence is manifested. It does not place us into that rigid chain 
of mutual obligation of the will’s sense of what is right, but rather in 
a free reciprocal relation of human sentiments that, without a feeling 
of compulsion, pervades the whole moral world. Benevolence binds 
human beings with each other in a much more profound way than 
the commitment to what is right, since now the fate of another is 
experienced as our own. This synthesis, by its nature, produces no 
rigidly closed form of the “ought” as in the case of the commitment 
to what is right; consequently, there has also been no distinctive 
label coined for it in language. But it is a form of necessity rooted in 
sentiment, of not being able to act otherwise, of standing under the 
power of an advancing and intensifying sentiment that approaches 
an inner necessity. Indeed, the movement or emotion of this senti-
ment is imparted even to the disinterested spectator, so that the in-
ner communion of human individuals that emerges in benevolence 
also resonates in the spectator, and is felt again by him in inclination, 
109
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
136 
I
empathy, and engagement with others. Compared to these manifes-
tations of genuine benevolence, approval and disapproval are cool 
abstractions that do not express the universal and substantial na-
ture of the moral judgment of benevolence.
3. Universal validity is the form in which we see all oughts that are 
not determined either by a mutual commitment or by empathy, but 
by a projected ideal. The synthesis that grounds its various forms 
is perfection, the striving for inner worth. It is distinctive of this 
perfection- oriented synthetic ground of our moral judgments that 
the value sought for on this basis as well as the meaning and perfec-
tion of our existence that hover before us are as a rule conceived by 
means of a theoretical presupposition. The urge toward perfection, 
like benevolence and fidelity to mutual justice, involves a creative 
synthesis of our moral organization; however, its conception and 
clarification in consciousness is obtained in combination with the 
theoretical content of the human spirit. Thus, there are as many dif-
ferent ways to understand the nature and basis of this urge for per-
fection and value as there are cultural stages. Sometimes perfection 
will be conceived from God’s viewpoint, sometimes in light of the 
purpose of the formation of the world itself. For better or worse, 
the entire content of our moral consciousness can be derived from 
theories of perfection.
These different forms of “ought” as presented here give various 
determinate shapes to moral systems and life itself. Sometimes it 
appears in the shape of moral commitment and obligation with an 
inflexible binding rigidity, and with the harsh character of condem-
nation that accompanies their violation. Then again— often in the 
lives of women, yet not seldom in [social] systems— benevolence 
and empathy become the basis of all our actions. Finally, then, we 
catch sight of the ought in the universally valid ideal whereby we 
envision perfection. Here our existence stands before us like the 
image that an artist feels compelled to give shape in marble. These 
three forms of synthesis intersect: They support each other in life 
but combat each other in morality. When one of the creative syn-
theses constituting our organization— either justice and its distinct 
mutuality or benevolence or perfection— is made into the explana-
tive ground of our moral world, then we find one theory pitted 
against another. But actually, these three synthetic elements that lie 
at the basis of all our moral judgments, supplement each other in 
the overall sense of our moral organization.
110
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
137
These forms consequently lead to content. Only in their content 
can they be completely elucidated. With content may we first hope 
to obtain an answer to Kant’s question:
Everything flows by us like a river and the changing tastes and 
the different shapes of humanity make the whole game of life 
uncertain and illusory. Where do I find the fixed landmarks 
that humans can never displace and from where can I signal 
them which shoreline to rely on?13
Accordingly, if the synthetic elements that ground the moral 
world sought by us are to possess the power to motivate, then they 
must involve a striving that presses toward its actualization. But 
these synthetic elements that form the ground of the moral world 
must motivate without making pleasure the goal of this motivation. 
How is this— which has emerged as the result of our analysis in var-
ious ways— to be conceived without contradiction? The synthetic 
element that connects our will and its envisioned world of values 
may not lie merely in one’s own pleasure, but rather in actions pos-
sessing a moral quality rooted in another synthesis connecting the 
will and the world of values. Two syntheses of this kind can be 
found in a self- reflective person. When the world of human values 
is conceived as connected to our will, but not through pleasure, this 
can happen through an envisioned inner worth to be realized by a 
person. Alternatively, the world of values can be connected with our 
will neither through our well- being nor through the inner worth of 
our person, but rather through the well- being and personal worth 
of others conceived as ranging from the nearest person to the most 
remote. Or finally, in negative terms, my will is, in relation to the 
world of values, bound by its own inner consistency; it is determined, 
limited.
These syntheses are by no means to be confused with motiva-
tions that contain this or that value. They are, rather, the practical 
attitudes of our will insofar as it is moral and by which it relates 
itself to the world of values. Thus, they could be designated as prac-
tical categories. They contain the synthetic element that connects the 
will and the world of values to the extent that their relation is of a 
moral nature.
13 Kant, Bemerkungen zu den Beobachtungen über das Gefühl des Schönen und 
Erhabenen, AA: 20, 46.
111
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
138 
I
And here the horizon of ethics expands. It beholds human spirit 
as it shapes the main forms of its existence on the basis of a priori 
syntheses. Psychological laws are purely laws of form. They have to 
do, not with the contents of the human spirit, but with its formal 
conduct and demeanor. They provide the language, the syntax, and 
the meter of the poetic creation that we might for the moment re-
gard as the human soul. Thus, it is the mistake of the psychology of 
peoples that it undertakes to explain history— and thereby the sum 
of human existence up to the present— simply on the basis of psy-
chology, the science of the forms in accordance with which mental 
life runs its course. The synthetic content that must always be added 
to what has been cognized about the course of history in order to 
derive laws from this process, lies not only in the properties of the 
human soul, but also in the parallel properties of social and polit-
ical development, in the nature of money, in the laws of national 
economies. But when one looks beyond this, human nature itself 
further contains, besides its lawful processes and the formal conduct 
of the soul, also fundamental elements of its contents. This is the 
great discovery of Kant, who recognized fundamental metaphysical 
presuppositions in the forms of judgment, namely, the categories. 
Parallel to these categories, syntheses appear within the moral world 
as fundamental to the connection between the will and values, and 
as constituting the practical relation between them. It is evident not 
only that at least the first two positive syntheses manifest themselves 
as feeling and strivings, but also that pleasure follows them. But ac-
tive benevolence, for instance, is driven neither by pleasure nor dis-
pleasure, nor is any resulting pleasure its goal. The essence of benev-
olence is that our will enters into a relation with the world of values 
quite immediately and exclusively through the well- being of another.
Here we find a series of psychological difficulties, but careful, inner 
observation confirms an inherent relationship [to the world of values] 
that psychological investigation must attempt to do justice to.14
<An ideal provides the image of a course of action to motivate 
us: It leads persons to place a demand on themselves. The goal is 
perfection, a longing for the unfolding of our capabilities, for the 
greatest enhancement of what is best in us. The ideal contains a 
tremendously strong ethical power, but it is not coercive. The ideal 
of the hero in the Iliad is not binding for the reader, but it inspires: 
The ideal of renunciation in the Catholic Church stands beyond the 
14 Here ends the section that was taken from the earlier essay “Versuch einer 
Analyse des moralischen Bewuβtseins.”
112
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
sYstem of etHIcs (1890) 
139
average human being. Commitment originates first through a vow. 
Apart from that, it floats above us.
The violation of duty excludes us from human associations; the 
violation of benevolence excludes us from the sphere of mutual de-
votion; the violation of an ideal excludes us from the intelligible 
world, from the spiritual world of idealistic existence.
That which determines the will, is, by its nature, differentiated 
into these three forms. An ethical system that derives the rules of 
being committed to what is right, the laws of benevolence, and the 
demands of an ideal from one [highest] principle in a simply uni-
form manner is a gigantic, singular fiction. Actually, we can only 
have an ethics that is built from the ground up, not one developed 
from above.>
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 PRESENT- DAY CULTURE AND 
PHILOSOPHY
(1898– 1900)
Translated by  
Patricia Van Tuyl and Rudolf A. Makkreel
PART II
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
1
What I should like to offer is not a mere academic philosophy. I can 
convey an appropriate philosophy only on the basis of an under-
standing of the present age. Let us attempt then to grasp the basic 
features of the present that shape this generation and define its phil-
osophical character.
The most general characteristic of our age is its sense of actuality 
and the worldliness of its interests. We cite Goethe’s words in Faust:
The earthly sphere I know sufficiently,
But into the beyond we cannot see;
A fool, that squints and tries to pierce those shrouds,
And would invent his like above the clouds!
Let him survey this life, be resolute,
For to the able this world is not mute.1
Since Goethe wrote those words, scientific progress has continued to 
reinforce this sense of actuality. The planet on which we live seems 
to shrink beneath our feet. Each of its elements has been measured, 
weighed, and defined in accordance with its lawful behavior. Remark-
able discoveries have brought distant regions of the earth right under 
our very eyes. Plants and animals from every continent have been 
collected in museums and gardens and catalogued in handbooks. The 
crania of all the races have been measured, their brains weighed, their 
beliefs and customs ascertained. Travelers study the psyche of prim-
itive peoples, and excavations make the remains of extinct cultures 
accessible to us. The romanticism with which the previous generation 
still viewed the culture of Greece or Israel’s religious development 
has disappeared, and we observe that events generally take place in a 
rather natural and human fashion. In politics, nations today consider 
the interests they have in every region of the globe, and they pursue 
This essay was originally published in Gesammelte Schriften, VIII, 190– 205, to which 
the pagination in the margins refers. It was composed from various fragments, includ-
ing a draft for the beginning of the lecture course on the “System of Philosophy” that 
Dilthey offered from 1898 on.
1 Goethe’s Faust, trans. Walter Kaufman, “The Second Part of the Tragedy,” lines 
11221– 11446 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1961), 459.
VIII,190 
191 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
144 
II
them relentlessly, to the extent permitted by a sober assessment of the 
power relations among nations.
One particularly characteristic consequence of this sense of actu-
ality can be seen in poets and writers. The idealistic pathos has lost 
its efficacy. We perceive more clearly the limitations in what is his-
torically great, and the impurities in the draught of life. We want to 
examine everything thoroughly and to fool ourselves no longer. In 
this respect, our feeling of life comes closer to that of Voltaire, Did-
erot, or Frederick the Great than to that of Goethe or Schiller. We 
are sensitive to what is problematic in life, and all the literature and 
art of the present day— the paintings of the great French realists, 
the realism in our novels and our theater— respond to this modern 
need. The mixed style of Schopenhauer, Mommsen,2 and Nietzsche 
have a more powerful effect than the pathos of Fichte and Schiller.
A second main feature of our age shapes its philosophy. The 
methods of the natural sciences have established a sphere of uni-
versally valid knowledge and have given humans dominion over the 
earth. More and more, they are advancing Bacon’s program that 
equates knowledge with power and prescribes causal cognition as 
the key to the progressive mastery over nature. It is the power of 
the natural sciences that has hastened progress on our planet in a 
most indisputable way. All the arts fostered by Louis XIV produced 
fewer significant lasting changes on earth than the mathematical cal-
culus quietly conceived at the same time by Leibniz and Newton. 
Thus, with the founding of the mathematical natural sciences in the 
seventeenth century, a new stage of history began. And no century 
accomplished a more significant and difficult project than the sev-
enteenth. 1) The development of mechanics connected mathematics 
with experimentation and gave science a firm foundation. Mathe-
matics explored numerical ratios, while experimentation disclosed 
which of them obtained in the motions of things. Galileo’s discov-
eries were the first and simplest examples of this method. He estab-
lished experimentally the rate of continuous acceleration of a falling 
body, and among the simple ratios of increasing acceleration one 
proved to be actualized here. 2) To the extent that changes in nature 
could be represented by motions, the new science proved capable of 
cognizing the laws of nature’s course. Light, sound, temperature, and 
electricity were all submitted to the methods of mathematical natu-
ral science. 3) The motions of heavenly bodies were also shown to be 
2 Theodor Mommsen (1817−1903), German classical scholar, famous for his 
multivolume History of Rome.
192
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
145
subject to the same natural laws. 4) Increasingly, chemical processes 
proved to be amenable to quantitative determination. As a conse-
quence, there arose in all these fields a reliable, universally valid 
natural science, which became the model for all sciences. And far 
beyond the sphere of mechanics— even in biology— human mastery 
over nature became possible on the basis of causal laws. Wherever 
in the vast system of nature, the causes of change become accessible 
to our will, we can intentionally bring about desired effects. In other 
cases, we can at least anticipate the effects. All this opened up an 
unlimited prospect for broadening our power over nature.
Now with this is linked a third characteristic of present- day cul-
ture. The belief in unchangeable social orders has disappeared, and 
we find ourselves in the midst of a transformation of these social or-
ders according to rational principles. Several factors have contrib-
uted to this tendency over the past centuries. 1) Gradually, the in-
fluence of industry and commerce spread from country to country. 
As a result, a shift in economic forces took place, which then had 
as its consequence a change in the social placement of the classes. 
New claims to political power were asserted, initially in the rise of 
the bourgeoisie, and then in the demand of the working classes for 
better economic conditions and greater political influence. These 
are the claims that shape the domestic policy of states today. 2) An-
other phase was the immense growth in consciousness of the rights 
of the individual person. a) It made its first appearance in religious 
movements— in the spiritualistic sects that were influential during 
the German Peasants’ War, in the religio- political movements in the 
Netherlands, and in English Puritanism. b) A firmer foundation for 
this right of the individual person was then sought in the philosoph-
ical movements of the modern period. Grotius, Voltaire, Rousseau, 
Kant, and Fichte represent stages in the advance of consciousness 
of this right; and this consciousness requires a corresponding social 
order. But where is the basis for this to be found? 3) Here another 
phase manifests itself in the effort to apply the scientific methods 
that had proven so fruitful in the study of nature to the problems of 
society. Independent human sciences were established. a) Under the 
influence of the natural sciences, political economy was developed 
as the theory of the laws of economic life starting with Quesnay.3 
It analyzes the complex formation of the socio- historical world in 
3 François Quesnay (1694– 1774): French economist and member of the Physio-
cratic school who served as court physician to King Louis XV and was most recog-
nized for his Tableau économique.
193
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
146 
II
terms of the natural laws of the specific purposive systems that co-
operate within it. b) Thus a new ideal of transforming society on 
the basis of its own natural laws emerged. 4) Finally, those subjects 
that institute this transformation change too. After the French Rev-
olution, the limited efforts of enlightened princes to make reforms 
increasingly gave way to the sovereign will of the people to provide 
themselves their own economic, political, and social orders. Free-
dom of association, increasing power of representative bodies, and 
the extension of direct, universal suffrage spelled the possibility of 
converting knowledge of the laws of social life into praxis.
2
Steep yourself fully in this sense of actuality, in the this- worldly na-
ture of our interests, and in this mastery of science over life! These 
basic features have defined the spirit of the nineteenth century and 
will likewise characterize the spirit of the new one standing before 
us, no matter how dim its outlines. One day this earth shall become 
the scene of free activity governed by thought, and no form of re-
pression can prevent it.
But now in asking what the ultimate end of activity is for the in-
dividual person and for the human race, the profound contradiction 
that permeates the present age stands revealed. This age is no wiser 
with respect to the great mystery of the origin of things, the value 
of our existence, or the ultimate worth of our activity than were the 
Greeks in the Ionian or Italian colonies or the Arabs during the age 
of Averroes.1 Indeed, because we find ourselves surrounded by such 
rapid scientific progress, these problems are more perplexing today 
than in any previous age. First, the positive sciences have increasingly 
dismantled the presuppositions that served as the basis for the reli-
gious faith and philosophical convictions of earlier centuries. What 
is given as actual with its sensible qualities proved to be the appear-
ance of something unknown. Secondly, the greatest achievements of 
1 Averroes (1126– 1198 A.D.), an influential and controversial Cordovan scholar 
who contributed to early philosophy, logic, medicine, music, and jurisprudence. 
Regarded by many as the most important Islamic philosopher, he is best known 
for his commentaries on Aristotle and his Tahafut al- Tahafut (Incoherence of the 
Incoherence).
194
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
147
philosophy in the last century, the analyses of consciousness and of 
conceptual cognition, have proven to be most complicit in this proj-
ect of destruction. Space, time, causality, and even the reality of an 
external world, were subjected to doubt. Thirdly, historical compar-
ison demonstrated the relativity of all historical beliefs. They are all 
conditioned by climate, race, and circumstance. Throughout history, 
there have been periods that questioned all established assumptions 
concerning the value of life and the goals of actions. Among them 
we can list the Greek enlightenment, the early Roman Empire, and 
the Renaissance. But if we compare these periods with our own, we 
see that in each successive age skepticism has become more radical. 
In our age, the anarchy of thought extends to ever more presupposi-
tions of thought and activity. Our capacity to survey the whole earth 
reveals to us more clearly than to any previous age the relativity of 
solutions to the mystery of the world. Indeed, historical conscious-
ness increasingly unveils the relativity of every metaphysical or reli-
gious doctrine that has been offered over the course of time. There 
seems to us to be something tragic in the human striving for concep-
tual cognition— a conflict between aspiration and ability.
Out of this dissonance between the sovereignty of scientific thought 
and the perplexity of the human spirit about itself and its significance 
in the universe arises the final and most characteristic feature of the 
spirit of the present age and its philosophy. The melancholy pride and 
the pessimism of a Byron, Leopardi, or Nietzsche have as their pre-
supposition the sovereignty of the scientific spirit over earth. At the 
same time, the emptiness of consciousness asserts itself in these think-
ers. Since all standards have been destroyed, and all that was stable has 
become precarious, an unfettered freedom from presuppositions and 
the play with illimitable possibilities allow the mind to enjoy its sover-
eignty, but, at the same time, cause it the pain of its lack of substance. 
This pain concerning the void, this awareness of the anarchy affecting 
all deeply- held convictions, this uncertainty concerning the values and 
the goals of life, has evoked the most diverse attempts in poetry and lit-
erature to answer the questions of the value and goal of our existence.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
3
 What Then Should the Stance of Philosophy Be  
in the Culture of the Present Day?
a) Its first and clearest task derives from the importance of the posi-
tive sciences in our age. These sciences require a foundation, for each 
of them contains presuppositions whose validity must be examined. If 
natural forces are conceived as a system of motions, then space, time, 
and the actuality of an external world are presupposed, and the legit-
imacy of such presuppositions must be tested. If thought proceeds on 
the basis that it can cognize external reality in terms of its laws, this 
presupposition must also be scrutinized. On these and many other 
points, then, the positive sciences need a foundation. Together with 
the demise of the metaphysical systems, this need prompted a return 
to Kant. But exposure of the inadequacies of Kant’s foundation gave 
rise to the movement that presently dominates philosophy in all the 
universities. It is necessary to pose the problem of knowledge as uni-
versally as possible and to prepare for the solution to this problem by 
means of sound, new methods. Indeed, wherever present- day philos-
ophy seeks the reliability of knowledge, its task is the development 
of a universal theory of science. Today we view things in universal 
terms.
b) Another task given to philosophy by the special sciences is the es-
tablishment of their systematic interconnection. This interconnection 
was originally found in metaphysics. But now that metaphysics has 
been repudiated and experiential science alone is acknowledged, this 
task must be accomplished by means of an encyclopedia, a hierar-
chy of the sciences. Positive philosophy, whose first advocates were 
Comte and the two Mills, undertook this task. In Germany, positiv-
ism reached its peak in Mach1 and Avenarius.2
The common doctrine of the positivists is that all human knowl-
edge is based on experience. Concepts are merely means for 
1 Ernst Mach (1838−1916), Austrian physicist.
2 Richard Avenarius (1843−1896) German- Swiss philosopher, who argued that 
scientific philosophy must be descriptive but not materialistic.
195 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
149
representing and connecting experiences. Science is a representa-
tion of experience that enables us to condense and make use of it. 
Philosophy is merely the compilation of the experiential sciences. 
Where the experiential sciences leave off, the inscrutable begins. 
Positivism is the philosophy of the natural scientists; all dispassion-
ate, scientifically- trained minds embrace it. They have found in the 
expansion of knowledge a clearly circumscribed purpose for their 
existence, and so, for them, the question of the value and purpose 
of life is resolved personally. Dispassionately and with resignation, 
they simply accept the inscrutable.
Now how can the unsatisfactoriness of this . . . 3? Not through 
metaphysics. Once it was the queen of the sciences: Aristotle, Aqui-
nas, Hegel.
c) Metaphysical academic philosophy is a philosophy of possibili-
ties, wishful thinking, etc.
The same principle of an indemonstrable, spiritually- blind au-
thority asserts itself within Protestant orthodoxy, and even extends 
itself into the theology of Ritschl.4 Here the skeptical spirit of our 
age is used to justify a relapse into the particular positivity of Lu-
theran religion. But after the entire historical foundation of such a 
faith has crumbled, the belief in ecclesiastical truths that have no 
point of contact with human self- reflection about its ideals becomes 
completely suspended in the void.5
In our present situation, where skepticism infects everything and 
extends to the foundation of every vital tendency, metaphysical ac-
ademic philosophy has achieved a shadowy existence. Instead, we 
need to raise to clear, well- founded consciousness what connects hu-
man strivings. Over against this the empty possibilities of metaphys-
ical conceptions prove to be academic futilities by the unruly way 
in which they combat one another. These glittering fairy tales may 
delight young people. But I warn you that they will collapse before 
the seriousness and efforts of your later life. For what remains from 
the philosophical intoxication of your university years will be noth-
ing but a philosophical hangover.
3 The rest of this sentence is illegible (H).
4 Albrecht Ritschl (1822– 1889), German Lutheran theologian, who accepted 
the reality of communal faith as a positive starting point. Also recognized for his 
attempts to relate Kantian ethical thought to Protestantism.
5 In the margin: “But even philosophy tries to vindicate idealism.” (H).
196 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
150 
II
What a hollow din emanates from these metaphysical disputa-
tions! It is like the end of the Middle Ages, when scholasticism was 
taught from every lectern. But the humanists triumphantly con-
quered the world. Today, this is the effect of thinkers like Carlyle, 
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Richard Wagner, Tolstoy, Maeterlinck.6 
When the possibilities of metaphysics derivable from any given 
groundwork are exhausted, the solution to the mystery of life seems 
to get lost in hazy forms.
When we are at the winding down of metaphysical thought as 
traditionally conceived and even believe that we are at the end of 
philosophy as a science, life- philosophy emerges. With every new 
manifestation, it rids itself of more and more metaphysical elements 
and becomes more free and independent. In the last generation, it 
has again become the dominant power. One by one, Schopenhauer, 
Richard Wagner, Nietzsche, Tolstoy, Ruskin, and Maeterlinck ex-
erted their influence on the young. The impact of life- philosophy 
has been strengthened by its natural connection with poetry; for the 
problems of poetry are also the problems of life. It has become a 
kind of methodical experience of life that fundamentally repudiates 
all systematic presuppositions. It is a methodical mode of induction 
that is directed toward the processes of human life and seeks to 
derive from them new essential characteristics of life.
It is the strength of this life- philosophy that its direct reference to 
life, free of metaphysical bias, reinforces whatever power of vision 
and of artistic depiction these thinkers possess. Their lives are a con-
tinual exercise in uncovering such characteristics. Just as scholastic 
thinkers developed the capacity to survey long series of syllogisms 
and inductive thinkers developed the power to see many instances 
alongside one another, these life- philosophers form a capacity to 
expose the secret paths by which the soul pursues happiness— not 
only the real relations among the inner longings that come to light 
from out of the darkness of our instinctive life and what presents it-
self from without as having productive value, but also the influence 
exerted upon these processes by the contents of memory, thought, 
and imagination. These writers thus occupy a space that profes-
sional philosophers always left unexplored.
6 Maurice Maeterlinck (1862– 1949). Belgian playwright and essayist, best 
known for his Symbolist drama Pelléas et Mélisande. His prose works blended mys-
ticism, occultism, and nature studies and were a typical Symbolist reaction against 
materialism and mechanism. Maeterlinck won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1911.
197 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
151
It was from this point of view that I referred to the need for a 
content- oriented psychology7 as a concern that precedes these de-
velopments of life philosophy. This kind of psychology has still not 
been classified among the technical undertakings of psychology, but 
belongs within descriptive psychology, somewhere between struc-
tural psychology and individual psychology.8
Content- oriented psychology focuses on particular relations 
among the occasional hidden processes operative within us and what 
affects us from without. It also attends to the particular possibilities 
for connecting the hidden processes operative within us to what ap-
pears from without as having efficacy in a life- course. By contrast, 
life- philosophy in the manner of Schopenhauer, etc., claims to ex-
press in a definitive way the highest value, the aim of life, the path to 
happiness itself. Whereas I have described the causal nexus in which 
the values of life are generated and the relations of our satisfaction- 
seeking selves to the external world in terms of “the meaning or sense 
of life,” these writers presume to express this meaning or this sense 
definitively. But by doing so, they become companions of the meta-
physicians. In their more limited sphere, they make the same claims 
as the metaphysicians. They too seek to grasp an ultimate uncondi-
tioned. And similarly their means to this end do not suffice. For the 
only sure test of the connections they seek lies in the rare moments 
that link what is hidden within us and what influences us. These links 
are merely observable at certain times in our lives— solitary bright 
points that shimmer on a vast dark sea whose depths are unfathom-
able. These life- philosophers speak only about themselves. What they 
see of life beyond themselves, they interpret in light of their own.
This very intention, which resembles the aspiration of the meta-
physicians, produces the peculiar shortcoming of this kind of life- 
philosophy. What it apprehends within the confines of its own indi-
viduality is correct within certain limits; but it becomes completely 
false when it takes its corner for the world in general. Those errors 
that Bacon derived from the idols of the cave rooted in individuality 
are destructive for these life- philosophers. They fail to recognize that 
they are bound by historical, geographical, and personal conditions. 
History is their refutation. Tortured by anxiety, Schopenhauer could 
7 Realpsychologie. Dilthey traced this content- oriented psychology back to 
Franz von Baader and Novalis. See Das Erlebnis und die Dichtung (13th ed. Stutt-
gart: B.G. Teubner; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1957), 194– 197.
8 This whole paragraph was later crossed out in pencil (H).
198
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
152 
II
only find relief from his unruly self in the contemplative attitude. 
Carlyle devotes himself to heroic striving as the highest value, in 
the manner of the great religious personalities. . . . 9 Tolstoy relives 
the leap from <barbarism> into abnegation. Maeterlinck’s problem 
is life. He begins with Stoic life- philosophy and, like the Stoics, 
attempts to combine pantheism with a heightened self- awareness. 
He thinks that only through consciousness of our relationship to 
the infinite, to the invisible, can human personality emerge. Ac-
cording to Maeterlinck, personality is connected with all of life 
and can become certain of its value only by grasping itself as the 
manifestation of something inscrutably divine. In The Treasure of 
the Humble,10 he derives his ideal of a new art from the calm and 
imperceptible relations of the simple soul to the invisible and from 
the consequent formation of personality. These are the center of his 
drama, in contrast to the grossly abnormal passions portrayed in 
Shakespeare’s dramas. Similarly, he derives from this the ideal of 
a mental enlivenment that attunes the most subtle concerns of the 
soul to the invisible.
In Wisdom and Destiny,11 Maeterlinck develops a program for 
making every lived experience useful for cultivating personality. His 
guiding idea now becomes the Stoic insight that only through the 
correspondence of our essence to things as they are, through a har-
mony established between the world and ourselves, can we recon-
cile an increase of independence with the submission to the powers 
of life. As the inaccessible ground of our psychic life becomes more 
powerful and vital, and as truth and righteousness are allowed to 
develop within it, it enters into a harmonious relationship with its 
outer destiny. His last work, Buried Temple,12 explicates how the prac-
tice of righteousness develops feelings of happiness within us, and 
therefore to a certain extent, make us independent of the external 
world. But then a decisive turn to paradoxical one- sidedness takes 
place, from which none of the life- philosophers of our age have been 
spared. We now hear of a timeless, invisible ego. 
9 A gap in Dilthey’s manuscript.
10 Maeterlinck, The Treasure of the Humble, trans. Alfred Sutro (New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1911).
11 Maeterlinck, Wisdom and Destiny, trans. Alfred Sutro (New York: Dodd, 
Mead, 1898, 1908).
12 Maeterlinck, Buried Temple, trans. Alfred Sutro (New York: Dodd, Mead, 
1905).
199
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
4.
The ultimate conclusion to be drawn from the denial of conceptual 
cognition in its discursive, logical mode is found in Nietzsche. For 
him, the culture- creating human being is initially the artist, then the 
scientist, and finally, since Nietzsche despairs even of the scientific 
mission, the value- creating, value- positing philosopher. It is charac-
teristic of an eccentric man of feeling and imagination, once he has 
transferred his entire vitality into one style of human existence, that 
when he experiences its inadequacy because no single life- image can 
be everything, he will just as vehemently reject it as he previously 
had affirmed it. The cultural mission of the artist manifested itself 
for Nietzsche in Richard Wagner. He did not project this mission 
onto Wagner, for Wagner already possessed this sense of himself. 
But the boundlessness and exclusivity with which Nietzsche now 
saw the unrivaled human being and creator in the artist, the blind-
ness toward the limitations of this form of life, had to turn into its 
opposite. Thus, he retained nothing positive either from the lived ex-
perience of his first period or from the Socratic mood of his second 
period. It was precisely the setting of boundaries that made Kant 
loathsome to him. So then there is also the third standpoint: The 
value- creating philosopher is again an unconditional, unbounded 
being. The philosopher is to heighten the feeling of the positive 
value of life in human beings and in this way to have a reforma-
tory effect upon them. But now surely Thrasymachus and Critias, 
Spinoza and Hobbes, Feuerbach and Stirner have expressed their 
affirmation of the will and its power strongly enough that history 
did not also need Nietzsche’s— not to mention those who, as artists 
or men of action, have lived according to this ideal. Thus the only 
task for these value- creating and value- positing philosophers is to 
declare which among those motley forms urged upon us by the will 
to life are valuable. To this question, passages from Nietzsche give 
no answer. He says nothing about the method according to which 
this new assayer, who will leave Galileo’s text with that title1 behind 
him, should proceed.
1 Galileo published a work entitled The Assayer, which argued that the only way 
to methodically examine nature is through the language of mathematics.
200
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
154 
II
[T]o begin with, the philosophic spirit always had to use as a 
mask and cocoon the previously established types of the con-
templative man— priest, sorcerer, soothsayer, and in any case 
a religious type— in order to be able to exist at all: the as-
cetic ideal for a long time served the philosopher as a form 
in which to appear, as a precondition of existence— he had 
to represent it so as to be able to be a philosopher; he had to 
believe it in order to be able to represent it. The peculiar, with-
drawn attitude of the philosopher, world- denying, hostile to 
life . . . is above all a result of the emergency conditions under 
which philosophy arose and survived at all. . . . [T]he ascetic 
priest provided until the most modern times the repulsive and 
gloomy caterpillar form in which alone the philosopher could 
live and creep about.2
Genuine philosophers, however, are commanders and leg-
islators: they say, “thus it shall be!” They first determine the 
Whither and For What of man, and in so doing have at their 
disposal the preliminary labor of all philosophical laborers, 
all who have overcome the past. With a creative hand they 
reach for the future, and all that is and has been becomes a 
means for them, an instrument, a hammer. Their “knowing” 
is creating, their creating is a legislation, their will to truth 
is— will to power.3
Philosophers, these “Caesarian cultivator[s] and cultural dy-
namo[s]”4 give us more than mere conceptual cognition; they are 
the “most sublime type of slave, but in [themselves] nothing.”5 “Even 
the great Chinaman of Königsberg was merely a great critic.”6 The 
creation of values thus becomes less and less determinate in 
2 Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, trans. Walter Kaufman and 
R. J. Hollingdale (New York: Vintage Books, 1969), 115– 16 (§10).
3 Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. Walter Kaufman (New York: Vintage 
Books, 1966), 136 (§211).
4 Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, 128 (§207).
5 Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, 128 (§207).
6 Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil 135 (§210). Dilthey also refers to Human, 
All Too Human, Part I, trans. Helen Zimmern (New York: Russell & Russell, Inc., 
1964), 18– 19 (§6); Part II, trans. Paul V. Cohn (New York: Russell & Russell, Inc., 
1964), 26 (§31). See also Daybreak, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982), 41– 42 (§41) and 61– 62 (§62); The Gay Science, trans. Wal-
ter Kaufman (New York: Vintage Books, 1974), 151; Beyond Good and Evil, 12– 13 
(§5).
201
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
155
content, and the method by which the philosopher creates them is 
nothing but personal intuition, just as it was with the artists and the 
life- philosophers of the eighteenth century. No statement concern-
ing the development of such a method is even given. The explana-
tion for this is to be found in Nietzsche’s attitude toward the actual 
sciences. Due to ignorance, he dismissed psychology as a science. 
What stands in the most curious contradiction to this is that he 
then proposed completely unverifiable psychological hypotheses 
concerning the origin of ethical norms and presented them as if they 
were scientific results. In the use of historical facts for understanding 
the purposive systems of culture, he remained an utter dilettante; but 
at the same time, on the strength of his initial starting point, namely, 
the cult of the genius and of great men, he isolated the individual. He 
severs the goals of the individual from the development of culture, 
since for Nietzsche, great men were not merely the motive forces, but 
also the true achievement of the historical process. Thus, for him, 
the individual is cut off from the purposive systems of culture, and 
thereby emptied of content; formally this means that individuals 
lose their connection with anything progressive and stable. And yet 
the transfer of interest to something progressive and stable is the 
most significant feature of the actual ethical theories of the modern 
period. Affirmation of life in this period is either about a personal 
involvement in the eternal aspects of knowledge and of artistic vi-
sion, or about cultural progress itself. So Nietzsche did not achieve 
what he had in mind, namely, to explicate the reformatory element 
in Socrates, Spinoza, and Bruno as characteristic of an aspect of 
philosophy that had not been understood until then.
Beyond Nietzsche, there is still a final, most extreme conception 
of philosophy. The values to be created by Nietzsche’s philosopher 
had the ring of objectivity, though they were not determinable in 
a universally valid manner. They would at least have an intuitive 
credibility. But this too can be discarded. Then the mind, its phil-
osophical products robbed of their universal validity and perma-
nence, becomes a power of creating conceptual fictions. But such a 
project must be self- destructive in that the result is not worth the 
effort.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 5.
The Historical Consciousness  
of the Nineteenth Century
According to the law of continuity, what the human spirit has been 
able to capture in philosophical generalizations as the ultimate 
expression of a particular phase of culture will be preserved. The 
unity of human reason in the cooperative efforts of the sciences, the 
character of universal validity, and the resulting general progress of 
the human spirit in dominating nature and society— these were the 
ultimate generalizations reached by the eighteenth century.
But this rationalization of the universe also meant an impov-
erishment of the human spirit. There is more to individuals in 
their living totality than is found in these abstract procedures for 
reaching methodical consciousness. We saw that the major world- 
perspectives of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were the 
expressions of great personalities. The context within which they 
were classified into three major forms of human world- view and 
life- ideals was conditioned by the regularity with which these three 
forms, by a sort of selection from among the possible world- views, 
have consistently become typical expressions of human nature in 
its complexity. But they achieved expression by the method of in-
tellectual abstraction and by presupposing the rationality of the 
universe. Even the value and immanent purposiveness of actual 
singularity was grasped by Leibniz in terms of the principle of suf-
ficient reason.
Of course, even in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
before Rousseau came on the scene, skeptics and mystics had pro-
tested against these presuppositions and this method. The skepti-
cal stance in particular was constantly in the background in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries— in Montaigne, Charron,1 
1 Pierre Charron (1541– 1603). French philosopher who published several works 
including De la sagesse, a system of moral philosophy that was heavily indebted to 
Montaigne.
202
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
157
Sanches,2  Pascal, and Pierre Bayle. And mysticism found in Pascal, 
even in Cartesianism, support for the most ingenious justification 
that had ever been devised. Finally, even in the lower stratum of 
culture, theological thought during this period was based chiefly 
on the inwardness of religious experience. In 1675, Spener’s Pia 
Desideria (Pious Desires)3 appeared. With this began the retreat 
from objective dogmatics to Christian self- experience. The epoch 
of basing religious dogma on rationality came to an end, since it 
could not compete with the philosophical system of rationality. 
But all these movements could not halt the culturally- entrenched 
advance of the rational system. It reached its scientific zenith at 
the beginning of the eighteenth century in Leibniz’ Theodicy and 
Newton’s Principia. In Voltaire, Wolff, Mendelssohn, and Less-
ing it found its fullest scientific expression; and it animated the 
reign of Frederick the Great. The limitations of every great philo-
sophical generalization always reveal themselves first in an inner 
disintegration. Human minds wither and become impoverished; 
they become uncertain of the principle that animated them. Or, 
when this principle is inherited, its power becomes exhausted by 
transmission.
This became most clear in the dullness of the Scottish School, 
etc. French positivism sank into a barren, colorless materialism. The 
German Enlightenment became vulgar in the likes of Nicolai4 and 
Biester.5 The principle of rationality had exhausted its power.
The movement that began with Rousseau and reached its con-
clusion in Romanticism contains an inner complex of new ideas 
that belong together. Rationalism had negated the past, and down-
graded the epochs of imagination, the affects, and formless sub-
jectivity to lower levels of human development. Rousseau came 
2 Francisco Sanches (1550– 1623). Portuguese or Galician Jewish philosopher 
who fled to France to avoid the Inquisition. He is best known for his Quod Nihil 
Scitur (That Nothing is Known), in which he argued that ultimate knowledge is an 
impossibility, but that we should nevertheless pursue what imperfect knowledge we 
can.
3 Philipp Jakob Spener (1635– 1705). A German theologian often referred to as 
the “Father of Pietism.”
4 Christoph Friedrich Nicolai (1733– 1811). A German writer who collaborated 
with Mendelssohn and Lessing on several periodicals that served as the mouthpiece 
for “popular philosophers.”
5 Johann Erich Biester (1749– 1816). A German “popular philosopher,” who was 
a friend to Kant and who frequently collaborated with Nicolai. He is perhaps most 
famous for his opposition to Fichte’s philosophy.
203
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
158 
II
along and even rejected this crowning period of human culture, 
thereby rejecting culture altogether. He did not, like the Pietists, 
look backward for more vital sources of human happiness. The 
mind of this powerful man was directed toward the future. In 
a milieu pervaded by absolutism, the courtly regulation of life, 
the abstractions of mathematical natural science, destruction and 
poverty, he sought a new beginning. Rousseau located this in the 
vital totality of human nature, in the human right to develop and 
to shape a world- view and ideal of life from its own resources. 
Such a stance of consciousness would have to inevitably lapse 
into empty passion or destructively incite the practical negation 
of society, if it failed to incorporate the content of the historical 
manifestations of the totality of human nature. Rousseau’s human 
beings would have to recognize themselves in the great writers and 
thinkers whose creations issued from the wholeness of the person. 
They would have to seek a more determinate and positive ideal in 
national life, where free, formative forces still pulsed with vitality. 
If humanity wishes to take possession of its actual nature and 
power and the full range of living possibilities of human existence, 
it can do this only through historical consciousness. Humanity 
must bring to consciousness and understand the most significant 
manifestations of itself. From them, it must extract concrete ideals 
for a more free and beautiful future. The totality of human nature 
exists only in history. Individuals become aware of and benefit 
from this totality only when they gather the genius of the past 
within themselves. It was for this reason that Herder, Schiller, and 
Goethe could not stop with Werther and The Robbers. They had 
to proceed to a concrete ideal. At first they found it in the Greeks. 
Then the Romantics went back to the primeval life of the German 
spirit. Finally, the Orient came to life.
Nevertheless, this power to reanimate past ages seems to have 
as its consequence an impotence of the human spirit to shape the 
future according to its own firm intentions. The Romantics submis-
sively yielded to the past with their whole persons, and the great 
gains of the eighteenth century seemed to have been lost. However, 
everything historical is relative in the sense that if we gather it all in 
consciousness, it seems to surreptitiously breed dissolution, skepti-
cism, and impotent subjectivity.
This exposes the problem posed by this epoch. What is rela-
tive must be brought into a more fundamental connection with 
what is universally valid. The sympathetic understanding of every-
thing in the past must become a force for shaping the future. The 
204
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
Present daY culture and PHIlosoPHY (1898) 
159
human spirit must connect the enhancement that has been acquired 
through true historical consciousness with the achievements of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The pioneers in this project 
were Hegel, Schleiermacher, Carlyle, and Niebuhr.6
But to proceed further, the consciousness of the relativity of all 
historical reality had to be pushed to its ultimate consequences. The 
study of all the conditions of human beings on earth, and contact 
with all nations, religions, and ideas, had to increase the chaos of 
relative historical facts. Not until we have appropriated all forms of 
human life, from primitive cultures up to the present age, into our-
selves, can we complete the tasks of seeking what is universally valid 
in the relative, of locating a secure future on the basis of the past, 
and of raising the subject to the level of historical consciousness. Fi-
nally, we must link the acceptance of what is actual as the measure 
of our progress in the future with clear goals for the future. Surely, 
historical consciousness itself must contain the rules and the power 
for dedicating ourselves freely and with sovereignty, in the face of 
the past, to a unified goal of human culture. When the human race 
is able to combine universally valid thought with clear goals based 
on such thought and the commonality of our tasks with a sound 
measure for what is attainable, then it can arrive at a fuller ideal of 
life. All this receives from historical consciousness a foundation that 
is no longer abstract, no longer merely conceptual, and no longer 
lapses into unbounded ideality. The generalization that philosophy 
in the present age must strive for is hereby specified: It would be to 
express our entire culture’s struggle to achieve a higher level than 
all previous cultures.
6 Barthold Georg Niebuhr (1776– 1831), German historian. His influential 
work, Römische Geschichte, began a new era of historiography based on scientific 
historical scholarship.
205
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
PART III
 DREAM
(1903)
Translated by  
Ramon J. Betanzos and Rudolf A. Makkreel
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
I wish to express my warmest thanks to the circle of well- wishers, 
friends, and students who have honored me with their congratula-
tions and with the gift of my portrait— and by such a hand!— and, 
finally, have brought me joy with this beautiful celebration. I had 
forbidden myself an official celebration for this day; but your gener-
ous gift based on personal feeling fills me with the deepest gratitude.
When I look back on my life, I am thankful that I have much 
happiness to acknowledge. First of all, I have been allowed to ex-
perience what I longed for even in my youth: the unification of our 
beloved German nation and the more liberal shaping of its regula-
tion of life. Moreover, I have been able to pursue my inclination to 
behold and meditate on the life of the world.1
We university professors certainly have a wonderful calling in be-
ing able to exert an independent influence in the widest of spheres. 
I was also blessed with a happy family life. My insatiable need for 
friendship has been reciprocated. I recall with sadness those who 
have passed on before me: my teacher Trendelenburg,2 and then 
Bernhard Erdmannsdörffer3 and Count Yorck.4 They are constantly 
in my thoughts these days.
This is a talk that Dilthey gave at the celebration of his seventieth birthday and was 
originally published in Gesammelte Schriften, VIII, 220– 226, to which the pagination 
in the margins refers.
1 “Life of the world” was originally “human affairs” in the first draft (H).
2 Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (1802– 1872), German philosopher whose cri-
tique of German Idealism was based on efforts to revive an Aristotle- inspired teleol-
ogy. When Dilthey left Heidelberg for Berlin as a student, Trendelenburg became one 
of his teachers and supervised his dissertation.
3 Bernhard Erdmannsdörffer (1833– 1901) was one of Droysen’s students in 
“The Ranke School” of nineteenth- century German historiography. A professor at 
Heidelberg from 1847 until his death, who regarded history as the political teacher 
of the nation.
4 Paul Yorck von Wartenburg (1835– 1897) was Dilthey’s close philosopher- 
friend to whom he dedicated his Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften.
VIII, 220 
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
164 
III
With a thankful heart I see about me loyal friends from earlier 
as well as more recent times, and my thoughts go to Eduard Zeller5 
in his quiet study.
But among my friends I still have special thanks to express today 
to my friend Professor Goldscheider, who has nurtured my worn- out 
body up to this day through all sorts of dangers with his inventive 
skills.
I have always regarded my students as my friends. I feel a special 
need to thank them today for what they have meant to me, for their 
love and loyalty conveyed through countless letters to which I now 
give my heartfelt response.
I have tried to teach my students the methods of research— both 
the art of analyzing the actual world that defines the philosopher 
and the importance of historical thought. I do not have the solution 
to the riddle of life, but I have always wanted to share with them 
the life- mood that has come about in me by reflecting on the conse-
quences of historical consciousness.
May I speak to you about this today? After all, it is a philosoph-
ical symposium that brings us together today.
Systematic form is indispensable for the cognitive sphere, but at 
the same time it is a limitation. — What I want to share with you 
today is this feeling for life which arises from historical conscious-
ness when it has been elevated by thought to a recognition of its 
import. This is what I also would have liked to give expression to-
day. But every expression of theory is too ponderous and too cold. 
However, my friend Wildenbruch6 has pointed out a way for me. I 
thank him for his words. It has always been a great fortune for men 
and women to be praised by a poet. Now, since he has summoned 
forth the poet in me, let him claim some credit for himself if the 
ash heap turns to glowing embers again as I attempt to express the 
life- attitude that has issued forth from the philosophical work of so 
many years, not in verse— fear not!— yet with a touch of the poetic.
5 Eduard Zeller (1814– 1908) was a well- known historian of philosophy (e.g. 
Die Philosophie der Griechen in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung, 3 vols., 1845– 
1852). Though his initial orientation was Hegelian, he was best known as a Neo- 
Kantian for most of his active career.
6 Ernst von Wi1denbruch (1845– 1909) was the author of a variety of dramas, 
novels, stories, patriotic songs, and sentimental ballads. As a poet he tried to rec-
oncile the older classic and romantic movements with contemporary realism and 
naturalism.
221
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
dream (1903) 
165
It was more than a decade ago. I had arrived at my friend’s castle 
in Klein- Oels7 on a calm summer evening. And, as was usually the 
case with him and me, our philosophical conversation lasted deep 
into the night. It was still echoing inside me as I undressed in the fa-
miliar old bedroom. I still stood for a long time, as I had often done, 
before the beautiful engraving of The School of Athens by Volpato8 
above my bed. This evening I especially enjoyed how the harmoni-
ous spirit of the divine Ra phael tamed the strife of systems locked 
in a life and death strug gle into a peaceful conversation. Over these 
gently interrelated figures hovered the atmosphere of peace which 
first sought to reconcile powerful differences between systems in the 
twilight of ancient culture and which was then also at work among 
the no blest spirits of the Renaissance. Tired and sleepy as I was, 
I lay down and went right to sleep. And immediately  Raphael’s 
picture and the conversations we had had were swallowed up in a 
busy dreamlife. In it the figures of the philosophers became real. 
From a vast distance I saw, from the left side, a long line of men in 
the va ried garb of subsequent centuries approaching the temple of 
the philosophers. Whenever one passed by me and turned his face 
towards me, I strained to recognize him. I saw Bruno, Descartes, 
Leibniz, and many others as I had remembered them from their pic-
tures. As they approached the steps of the temple to press closer, the 
walls gave way to a spacious field where they intermingled with the 
figures of the Greek philosophers. And then something happened 
which aston ished me even in my dream. As though driven onwards 
by some inner compulsion, they pushed towards one another to 
form a single group. At first the movement pressed towards the 
right side where the mathematician Archimedes is drawing his cir-
cles and the astronomer Ptolemy could be recognized by the globe 
he is carrying. Then, those thinkers gathered together who ground 
their explanation of the world on a stable, all- encompass ing phys-
ical nature. They proceeded upwards from below, searching for a 
uniform causal explanation of the universe from a system of mu-
tually dependent natural laws and thus to subordinate spirit to 
nature— even to the point of being resigned to limit knowledge to 
what can be cognized by the natural- scientific method. Among the 
7 Klein- Oels was the family home of the von Wartenburgs. It is located near 
Wroclaw, Poland, formerly Breslau, Germany, when Dilthey taught there. Dilthey’s 
“dream” thus took place at his friend Paul Yorck von Wartenburg’s castle.
8 Giovanni Antonio Volpato (1733– 1803) was a copperplate engraver whose 
best works were engravings based on the Raphael frescoes in the Vatican.
222
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
166 
III
throng of these materialists and positivists I recognized d’Alembert 
by his fine features and his ironic smile, which seemed to mock the 
dreams of the metaphysicians. I also saw Comte there, the system-
atizer of positive philosophy, to whom a circle of thinkers from all 
nations listened with respect.
And now a new procession pushed towards the middle, where 
Socrates and the noble elderly figure of the divine Plato were, both 
of whom had undertaken to use human consciousness of God to 
ground knowledge of a supersensible world order. There I also saw 
Augustine, whose heart thirsted for God so passionately, around 
whom many philosopher- theologians had gathered. I listened to 
their conversation, in which they strove to link the idealism of per-
sonality, which is the soul of Christianity, with the teach ings of 
those venerable ancients. And then Descartes moved away from the 
group of mathematical natural scientists— a tender, delicate figure 
who seemed to have been virtually worn out by the force of think-
ing and to have become attracted by a kind of inner compulsion to 
these idealists of freedom and of personality. But then the whole 
circle opened up as the slightly stooped, delicate- limbed figure of 
Kant approached with his three- cornered hat and walking stick, his 
features seemingly stiffened by the strain of thinking— - the great 
man who elevated the idealism of freedom to critical consciousness 
and thus reconciled it with the empirical sciences. And walking up 
the steps with a still youthful gait towards Master Kant was a ra-
diant figure with his noble head bowed in contemplation, in whose 
melancholy features deep thought and poetically idealistic vision 
blended with a presentiment of the fate which was to befall him— 
the poet of the idealism of freedom, our Schiller. Fichte and Carlyle 
had already drawn near. Ranke, Guizot, and other great historians 
seemed to me to be listening to these two. But I felt a strange shud-
der go through me when I saw at their side a friend from my youth, 
Heinrich von Treitschke.9
Scarcely had all these assembled when thinkers of all na tions 
gathered together, again on the left, around Pythagoras and Hera-
clitus, who first intuited the divine harmony of the universe. Gior-
dano Bruno, Spinoza, and Leibniz were also there. It was marvelous 
to see the two great Swabian thinkers of our nation, Schelling and 
9 Heinrich von Treitschke (1834– 1896) was a famous historian and advocate 
of German Realpolitik, a champion of Prussian authority in a united Germany. His 
most famous work is the monu mental Deutsche Geschichte im 19. Jahrhundert (5 
vols., 1879–1894).
223
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
dream (1903) 
167
Hegel, hand in hand as in the days of their youth and with the vigor 
of youth. All of them were heralds of a ubiquitous, spiritual, divine 
force in the universe, a force that inhabits every thing and every 
person, producing its effects in accordance with natural laws, so 
that, apart from it, there is no transcendent order and no sphere 
of free choice. It seemed to me that all of these thinkers concealed 
poetic souls behind their furrowed countenances. Among them also 
there was a stormy, forward- pressing commotion until finally a 
majestic figure, erect and almost rigid, strode forward with mea-
sured step: I was struck with awe as I caught sight of the great eyes 
blazing like suns and the Apollonian head of Goethe. He was in 
his mid dle years, and all his creations— Faust and Wilhelm Meister, 
Iphigenia and Tasso— seemed to hover about him, and all his great 
thoughts about the formative laws extending from nature to human 
creativity.
Between these great figures, there were other individuals stand-
ing and moving about uneasily. They seemed, in vain, to want to 
mediate between positivism’s harsh denial of all mysteries of life 
and metaphysics; between an all- encompassing determinism and 
personal freedom.
But the mediators shuffled busily back and forth between these 
groups to no avail. The distance separating them grew larger by 
the second; then even the ground between them itself vanished; a 
terribly hostile alienation seemed to divide them. A strange anxiety 
overcame me that there could be perhaps three or even more itera-
tions of philosophy. The unity of my own being seemed to be torn 
asunder, since I was attracted now to this group and now to that 
one. Yet I strove to preserve this unity, and as I was struggling with 
these thoughts the cover of sleep became thinner and lighter, the 
figures in my dream faded away, and I woke up.
The stars glistened through the large windows of my bedroom. 
The immeasurable and unfathomable nature of the universe over-
whelmed me. As though liberated, I recalled the comforting thoughts 
I had expressed to my friend in our nocturnal conversation.
This immeasurable, incomprehensible, unfathomable universe is 
reflected variously in religious visionaries, in poets, and in philoso-
phers. They are all affected by time and place. Every world- view is 
historically conditioned, hence limited, and relative. A horrendous 
anarchy of thought seems to follow from this. But the very his-
torical consciousness which has produced this absolute doubt can 
also define its bounds. Firstly, the world- views have differentiated 
themselves in accordance with an inner law. Here my thoughts went 
224
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
168 
III
back to the great basic forms of world- view as they were sketched 
out for me in my dream in the image of three groups of philos-
ophers. These world- view types have maintained themselves side 
by side over the centuries. And now the other or liberating aspect. 
World- views are grounded in the nature of the universe and in their 
relationship to finite, cognitive spirit. Thus each of them expresses, 
within the bounds of our thought, one side of the universe. Each 
world-view is to that extent true; but each is one- sided. It is impos-
sible for us to see these sides simultaneously. We have access to the 
pure light of truth only in variously refracted rays.
Here we confront an old, problematic alliance. The philosopher 
seeks universally valid knowledge and thereby a resolution of the 
riddles of life. This linkage must be loosened.
Philosophy shows us two faces. The inextinguishable im pulse for 
metaphysics wants to solve the riddle of the world and of life, and 
in this regard, philosophers are akin to religious thinkers and poets. 
But philosophers differ from them inasmuch as they want to solve 
this riddle through universally valid knowledge. This long- standing 
link must be dissolved by us today.
The primary and highest task of philosophy is to consider the 
objective mode of thought of the empirical sci ences, which extracts 
an order based on laws from phenomena and raises it to a con-
sciousness of itself with the intent of justifying it. There is a reality 
accessible through phenomena, namely, an order based on laws. 
This is the only truth given to us that has universal validity, albeit 
in the sign language of our senses and our cognitive capacity. This is 
the subject matter of the basic science of philosophy. This ground-
ing of our knowledge is the great function of the basic science of 
philosophy. Every true philosopher since Socrates has worked to 
help build that science. Another task of philosophy is to organize 
the empirical sciences. The spirit of philosophy is always present 
where the foundations of a science are simplified, or where sciences 
are linked to one another, or where their relation to the idea of 
knowledge is established, or where methods are tested for their cog-
nitive value. But it seems to me that the time is coming to an end 
for distinct philosophies of art and religion, of law or the state. The 
highest function of philosophy will therefore require grounding, le-
gitimation, critical consciousness, and an organizing power that en-
compasses all objective thinking, value- determinations, and purpo-
sive ends. The mighty system that will emerge from this is destined 
to guide the human race. The natural sciences have transformed the 
225
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
dream (1903) 
169
external world, and now the world epoch is upon us in which the 
sciences of society will gain a growing influence on society itself.
Beyond this universally valid knowledge lie the questions with 
which we must grapple ourselves as persons, since, in the last anal-
ysis, with respect to life and death, each of us stands alone. The 
answer to such questions exists only at the level of the world- views 
that express the many- sidedness of reality for our understanding 
in different forms while referring to one truth. This truth is not 
cognizable; every system is entangled in antinomies. Historical con-
sciousness breaks the final chains that philosophy and natural sci-
ence could not break. Human beings now stand entirely free. But 
at the same time, that historical consciousness preserves the unity 
of the human soul for us; it gives us a view into the nexus of things 
which is, to be sure, unfathomable but accessible to the vital core 
of our being. Let us find solace by honoring a part of the truth in 
each of these world- views. And if the course of our life brings only 
particular aspects of this unfathomable nexus to our attention— so 
long as the truth of the world- view that expresses this aspect takes 
energetic hold of us, then let us be satisfied with that: The truth is 
present in all of them.
These roughly were the thoughts that crossed my mind, as they 
would for someone who is lying awake between one dream and 
another— they were ideas that I reflected upon for a long time, with 
my gaze directed on the splendor of the stars in summer. Finally, a 
light morning slumber came over me, along with the dreams that 
usually accompany it. The starry vault seemed to me to glisten ever 
more brightly as the light of morning poured in. Ethereal and se-
rene shapes moved across the sky. As I awoke, I tried in vain to 
recall these happy visions. But I felt the serenity of the highest free-
dom and human spontaneity that had expressed itself in them. I 
have recorded this dream for my friends so that something of the 
life- sentiment that emanates from it might communicate itself to 
them. More earnestly than ever before, our generation is seeking to 
read into the mysterious unfathomable countenance of life, with its 
laughing mouth and its eyes full of melancholy. Yes, my friends, let 
us strive towards the light, toward the freedom and the beauty of 
existence. But not by means of a new beginning that shakes off the 
past. We must take the old gods with us into every new homeland. 
Only he lives life to the full who gives himself to it. . . . In vain did 
Nietzsche search in lonely self- examination for an original nature, 
his ahistorical essence. He peeled off one skin after the other. And 
226
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
170 
III
what did he have left? Only something historically conditioned: the 
features of the Renaissance man of power. What man is, only his 
history can tell him. It is in vain that others cast the entire past be-
hind them in order to start with life, as it were, anew and without 
prejudice. They cannot shake off what has been, and the gods of 
the past become ghosts to them. The melody of our life is condi-
tioned by accompanying voices from the past. Human beings free 
themselves from the torment of the moment and from the fleeting 
character of every joy only by submitting themselves to the great 
objective forces that history has generated. Commitment to these 
forces, not the subjectivity of whim and of pleasure, is what recon-
ciles sovereign personality with the course of the world.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
PART IV
 THE ESSENCE OF PHILOSOPHY (1907)
Translated By  
John Krois and Rudolf A. Makkreel
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Introduction
We are accustomed to use the general heading of philosophy to des-
ignate a large number of intellectual products created in different 
nations over the course of history. When we express what is com-
mon to these specific products that are usually called philosophy or 
philosophical in an abstract formula, then we obtain a conception 
of philosophy. This conception would attain its highest perfection if 
it adequately explicated the essence of philosophy. Such a concept 
of the essence of philosophy would express the formative law that 
is operative in the development of each individual philosophical 
system and bring out the affinities among the particular facts that 
could be derived from it.
A solution to this ideal task is possible only on the presupposition 
that what we designate as “philosophy” or call “philosophical” also 
really contains such a universal content and that a formative law 
is in fact operative in all these individual cases. This would ensure 
that there is an inner nexus unifying the entire domain to which 
this word is applied. And we assume this whenever we speak of the 
essence of philosophy. The term “philosophy” is then used to refer 
to a universal object. A spiritual affinity is assumed to underlie the 
particular facts to provide the uniform and necessary foundation 
of the empirical facts of philosophy, the rule governing its changes 
and the ordering principle that articulates its various forms.
Can we speak in this strict sense of an essence of philosophy? 
This is by no means self- evident. The terms “philosophy” and “phil-
osophical” have so many different meanings, varying with time and 
place, and the intellectual products given this name by their creators 
are so varied that it might seem as though different eras had simply 
affixed this beautiful word coined by the Greeks, to quite diverse 
human products. Some conceive philosophy as the foundation of 
V, 339
340
This essay was originally published in Systematische Philosophie, vol. I, 6 of the 
collection Die Kultur der Gegenwart, ed. Paul Hinneberg (Leipzig: Teubner Verlag, 
1907, 1– 7), and in 1924 it was republished with some changes in Dilthey‘s Gesam-
melte Schriften vol. V. The pagination in the margins refers to the latter.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
174 
IV
the particular sciences. Others extend this concept of philosophy by 
including the further task of deriving the system of the particular 
sciences from this foundation. Sometimes philosophy is even limited 
to this system of the sciences. Then, again, philosophy is defined as 
the science of spirit and inner experience. Finally, it is also under-
stood as a coming to terms with the conduct of life or the science 
of universally valid values. Where is the inner link that connects 
such different conceptions of philosophy, such disparate forms of 
thought? Where is the unitary essence of philosophy? If such an 
essence of philosophy cannot be found, then we are dealing merely 
with different functions that emerged under various historical cir-
cumstances to meet cultural needs, and which bear a mere superfi-
cial common designation due to historical accidents of terminology. 
In that case there are philosophies, but no philosophy. Then the 
history of philosophy has no necessary, inner unity. It will attain 
a different content and a different scope at the hand of individual 
historians of philosophy according to the conception of it that they 
arrive at in the context of their own systems. Then one historian 
might present this history as a progression towards a deeper and ever 
more fundamental grounding of the individual sciences, another as 
the progressive reflection of spirit on itself, yet another as the in-
creasing scientific understanding of life- experience and life- values. 
In order to decide the extent to which we may speak of an essence 
of philosophy we must turn from the conceptual definitions given 
by philosophers to the historical facts of philosophy itself. These pro-
vide us with the material for cognizing what philosophy is. The result 
of this inductive procedure can then be more deeply understood in 
accordance with its lawfulness.
By what method can we solve the problem of determining the 
essence of philosophy on the basis of the historical facts? This is a 
general methodological problem of the human sciences. The subjects 
of all the assertions of these sciences are socially related, individual 
life- units. They are, to begin with, individual persons. They manifest 
themselves in expressive gestures, words, and actions. The task of the 
human sciences is to re- experience and grasp them in thought. The 
psychic nexus expressed in these mani festations makes it possible to 
point out something typical and recurrent in them, and to organize 
these parti cular life- moments in a system of life- phases and, finally, 
in the unity of a life. Individuals do not exist in isolation, but are 
related to one another in terms of families, more complex associa-
tions, nations, historical periods, and, finally, humankind itself. The 
purposiveness of these singular organizations makes possible the 
341
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
175
typical perspectives provided by the human sciences. Yet there is 
no concept that can exhaust the content of these individual unities. 
Instead, the manifold nature of their intuitive content can only be 
captured through lived experience, understanding, and description. 
Moreover, the way they are interwoven in the course of history is 
singular and inexhaustible for thought. But the formations and 
combinations of such singularities are not arbitrary. None of them 
fail to express an experiential structural unity of individual and 
community life. Every narrative about even the simplest state of af-
fairs seeks to make it understandable by subsuming it under general 
representations or concepts of psychic functions. These narratives 
complete what perception offers piecemeal by using available gen-
eral representations or concepts to produce the kind of connected-
ness provided by one’s own lived experience. Under the guidance 
of attainable experiences of life- values, instrumental values, and 
purposes— details are selected from this material and related into 
something meaningful and significant. In the method of the human 
sciences there is a perpetual reciprocity between lived experience 
and the concept. The concepts used in the human sciences find their 
fulfillment in the re- experiencing of individual and collective struc-
tural systems, while this immediate re- experiencing itself is raised 
to the level of scientific cognition by means of universal forms of 
thought. When these two functions of consciousness in the human 
sciences converge, then we grasp what is essential in human devel-
opment. This consciousness should admit no concept in the human 
sciences that has not been formed from the full range of historical 
re- experiencing. It should contain nothing universal that does not 
express the essence of some historical reality. Nations, ages, and his-
torical phases of development are not arbitrary formations. Rather, 
bound as we are to the necessity of re- experiencing, we use them to 
articulate what is essential about humanity and different peoples. 
Accordingly, we misunderstand the interest that thinking human 
beings bring to the historical world if we regard concept formation 
in this terrain merely as instrumental for depicting and exhibiting 
what is singular. Thought strives to surpass the mere depiction and 
stylization of facts and particulars in order to attain cognition of 
what is essential and necessary. It seeks to understand the structural 
coherence of individual and social life. We can only attain power 
over social life to the extent that we grasp and make use of its regu-
larities and connectedness. The logical form that expresses such reg-
ularities are propositions whose subjects, like their predicates, are 
universal.
342
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
176 
IV
Among the various universal subject- concepts that serve this task 
of the human sciences are philosophy, art, religion, law, and econ-
omy. Their character is determined by the fact that they not only 
express a state of affairs found in many human subjects, namely, a 
recurring uniformity and universality, but also an inner nexus that 
connects these different persons by means of this state of affairs. So 
the term “religion” designates not only a universal state of affairs, 
such as a vital relationship of the psychic nexus to invisible forces; 
it also refers to a communal dimension in which individuals unite 
in religious acts and yet adopt differentiated attitudes toward these 
religious functions. Individuals involved in religion, philosophy, or 
art manifest a dual relationship. They stand as particulars under 
a universal, as instances of a rule, and at the same time they are 
united as parts in a whole according to this rule. The reason for this 
will become clear to us later from insight into the two- fold directed-
ness exhibited in the psychological formation of concepts.
The function of these universal concepts is very important in the 
human sciences. For in them our grasp of the regularities just as 
in the natural sciences is possible only by separating out from the 
tangled web of the human socio- historical- world specific contexts 
within which uniformities, inner structures, and development can be 
discerned. Analysis of the complex, empirically given, actual world 
is the first step towards great discoveries in the human sciences as 
well. In this endeavor we first encounter general representations 
that characterize the common features of those contexts that have 
already been distinguished and separated from the complexity of 
the actual world— thus allowing us to coordinate these contexts. 
To the degree that differentiations are correctly made through such 
representations, the general subject- terms of the resulting proposi-
tions are capable of supporting a self- contained sphere of fruitful 
truths. Already at this stage, terms like “religion,” “art,” “philoso-
phy,” “science,” “economy,” “law” are formed for what is expressed 
in such general representations.
Scientific thought has as its basis the schematism that inheres in 
these general representations. But it must test the correctness of this 
schematism. It is dangerous for the human sciences to accept these 
general representations at face value since the discovery of uniformi-
ties and their articulation is dependent upon whether they really do 
express a uniform state of affairs. Accordingly, the goal of concept- 
formation in this area is to find the essence of the thing that was 
already at work in determining the general representation and in 
giving it a name. By means of this essence we should be able to correct 
343
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
177
the indeterminate and perhaps deficient general representation and 
raise it to the level of univocal determinacy. This, therefore, is our 
task with regard to the concept and essence of philosophy.
But how are we to more precisely determine the procedure by 
which we can move reliably from a general representation and 
denomination to the concept of the thing? Concept- formation ap-
pears to involve a circle. The concept of philosophy, as well as that 
of art or of religiosity or of law, can only be found by deriving the 
complex of distin guishing marks that constitute the concept from 
the states of affairs that these things consist of. This presupposes a 
prior decision concerning which psychic states of affairs are to be 
designated as philosophical. But this decision could only be made if 
thought was already in possession of the distin guishing marks that 
are sufficient to establish the character of philosophy on the basis of 
the relevant states of affairs. Hence, it seems that we already must 
know what philosophy is when we begin to form its concept from 
the facts.
The methodological question would of course be immediately 
solved if these concepts could be deduced from more general [i.e., 
universal] truths. Then the inferences from particular states of af-
fairs would only serve as a supplement. And this was the opinion 
of many philosophers, especially in the German speculative school. 
But as long as they could not come to an agreement about a uni-
versally valid derivation or gain universal recognition for an in-
tuitive insight, it would be necessary to make do with inferences 
that proceed from the facts of the case and use empirical methods 
to seek the uniform states of affairs. This is the genetic lawfulness 
that is expressed in the phenomenon of philosophy. This procedure 
must presuppose that behind the designation that it finds in use 
there lies hidden a uniform state of affairs, so that thought does 
not wander fruitlessly when it turns its attention to the range of 
phenomena that are designated as philosophy or philosophical. The 
validity of this presupposition must be tested by the investigation 
itself. It derives the concept of the essence of philosophy from the 
different states of affairs that we designated with the names “phi-
losophy” or “philoso phical” and the concept of the essence must 
then make possible the explanation of the application of the name 
to these states of affairs. There are two points of departure in the 
sphere of such concepts as philosophy, religion, art, or science: the 
affinity among the particular states of affairs and the overall nexus 
or system to which they are connected. As the particular character 
of each of these universal disciplinary concepts becomes fruitful for 
344
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
178 
IV
the differentiation of the method, we then have the further advan-
tage that philosophy became self- conscious of its own activity from 
early on. There are a great many attempts to define the concept of 
philosophy in the procedural way that we are aiming at. They are 
an expression of how individual philosophers have been determined 
by a given cultural situation and guided by their own system in their 
view of philosophy. Hence, these definitions are abbreviations of 
what is characteristic of a particular historical form of philosophy. 
They give an insight into the inner dialectic whereby philosophy has 
considered the possible roles it can play in the context of culture. 
Each of these possibilities must have the potential to be made fruit-
ful for the conceptual determination of philosophy.
The circle in the process of defining the concept of philosophy 
is unavoidable. There is in fact great uncertainty about the bounds 
within which a system is to be called philosophy or works are to 
be termed philosophical. This uncertainty can only be overcome if 
we first establish reliable, albeit insufficient, definitions of philoso-
phy and go on from them by new procedures to further definitions 
that gradually exhaust the con tent of the concept of philosophy. 
Therefore, the method can only be to apply specific procedures, 
each of which taken by itself is not enough to insure a universally 
valid and complete solution to the task; yet gradually it can more 
carefully delimit the essential features of philosophy. In this way we 
can more firmly establish the scope of the states of affairs that fall 
within it and, finally, determine from the vital core of philosophy 
why border areas remain that do not permit a pure demarcation of 
their scope. We must first attempt to find a common state of affairs 
among those systems on the basis of which each of them forms a 
general representation of philosophy. Then the other aspect offered 
by the concept, the fact that the systems belong to some context, 
can be used to test the result and to supplement it with a deeper 
insight. With that we have the basis for examining the relation-
ship of the essential characteristics of philosophy to the structural 
system of the individual and society, to grasp philosophy as a liv-
ing function in the individual and in society, and so, to combine 
these features to create an essential concept. Using this concept we 
can understand the rela tionship of specific systems to the function 
of philosophy, situate the systematic conceptions of philosophy in 
their proper place and sharpen the blurred borders that outline it. 
This is the course that our investigation will take.
345
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ONE
Historical Procedure for Determining the Essence  
of Philosophy
1. First Determinations Concerning Philosophy’s 
General Subject Matter.
There are philosophical systems that above all others have entered 
into the consciousness of mankind and that have constantly ori-
ented us concerning what philosophy is. Democritus, Plato, Ar-
istotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Hume, Kant, Fichte, 
Hegel, and Comte have all produced systems of this kind. They 
have features in common by means of which thought attains a 
standard for determining the extent to which other systems can be 
integrated into the domain of philosophy. Initially, we can discern 
features of a formal nature in these philosophies. Regardless of the 
subject- matter of the different systems or the method they follow, 
they distinguish themselves from particular sciences by being based 
on the entire scope of empirical consciousness— life, lived experi-
ence, and the sciences of experience— and seek to solve their task on 
that scale. They aim at universality, which is matched by a striving 
to connect diverse particulars, to produce systematic coherence, and 
to extend it without regard to the boundaries of the particular sci-
ences. The other formal feature of philosophy lies in the demand for 
universally valid knowledge and, bound up with it, the attempt to go 
back to the ultimate foundation of philosophy. Whoever immerses 
himself in a comparative study of the classic systems of philosophy 
also comes to intuit, at first only vaguely, the way the contents of 
the systems belong together. The testimony of philosophers about 
their own creativity— testimony well worth gathering— reveals that 
from youth on all these thinkers were filled with struggles concern-
ing the riddles of life and the world. This concern with the problem 
of the world asserts itself distinctively in each of the systems. Even 
the formal characteristics of the different philosophers reveal hidden 
connections to their inner development and shaping of personality, 
and to the attainment of spiritual sovereignty. Their intellectual dis-
position is to bring all activity to consciousness and to leave nothing 
in the obscurity of mere behavior that is ignorant of itself.
346
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
180 
IV
2. Historical Derivation of the Essential 
Features of Philosophy from the Coherence  
of Its Systems
Now a procedure presents itself to us that permits a deeper view 
into the inner connections between these features, explaining the 
differences in the definitions of philosophy, giving each of these 
formulas its historical position, and more exactly determining the 
scope of the concept.
The concept of philosophy contains not only a universal content, 
but also an inner linkage— a historical continuum. From the start 
philosophers directly face the riddle of the world and life, and the 
concepts of philosophy they form are derived from this concern. Ev-
ery position staked out in the spiritual history of philosophy refers 
back to this kind of fundamental question. All vital philosophical 
efforts emerge from this continuum. The past of philosophy acts on 
individual thinkers so that even when they despair about it provid-
ing any solutions to this great riddle of life, they are conditioned 
by this past in the process of arriving at a new position. In this way 
all conscious philosophical attitudes, all conceptual definitions of 
philosophy in which these attitudes are expressed, form a historical 
nexus.
 1. The Origin of the Name in Greece and What It Meant There
The rich and profound interconnectedness of religion, art, and phi-
losophy for the Orientals was split by the Greeks into the differ-
entiated functions of these three forms of spiritual creativity. Their 
bright, self- confident spirit liberated philosophy from the bonds of 
religiosity and the visionary symbolism of philosophical and reli-
gious poetry. The plasticity of their visionary power contributed 
to the formation of distinct species of spiritual creation. Hence 
philosophy arose with the Greeks along with its concept and the 
expression philosophia. Herodotus calls everyone who excels in 
higher intellectual activity a sophos. He assigns the name sophistes 
to Socrates, Pythagoras, and other ancient philosophers, while Xe-
nophon uses it for the nature- philosophers. In the language used 
during the time of Herodotus and Thucydides the compound word 
philosophein means first and foremost the love of and search for 
wisdom, as the new spiritual stance of the Greeks. They assigned to 
this word the idea of the search for truth for its own sake, the search 
347
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
181
for a value independent of all practical applications. Thus Herodo-
tus has Croesus say to Solon, in that typical image of the opposition 
between the oriental will for power and the new Greek ethos, that 
he has heard that Solon had wandered through many lands philos-
ophizing (philosopheōn) for theory’s sake (theōriēs heineken)— 
thereby explicating what it means to “philosophize.” Thucydides 
then uses the same word in the Periclean funeral oration in order to 
give expression to a basic characteristic of the contemporary Athe-
nian spirit. The word “philosophy” is then elevated to the position 
of a technical term for a determinate sphere of intellectual activity 
in the Socratic school. The traditional attribution of this to Pythag-
oras may be transferring a Socratic- Platonic notion to an earlier 
period. The concept of philosophy in the Socratic- Platonic school, 
however, has a noteworthy duality.
For Socrates, philosophy is not wisdom but rather the love of 
and quest for wisdom because the gods have reserved wisdom for 
themselves. The critical consciousness that grounds knowledge for 
Socrates, and more profoundly for Plato, at the same time defines 
its bounds. Plato was the first to focus on the essence of philosophy 
along the lines of earlier indications, especially those of Heraclitus. 
Beginning with the experiences of his own philosophical genius, he 
characterizes the philosophical impulse and its unfolding into phil-
osophical knowledge. All greatness in life derives from a spiritual 
enthusiasm that is grounded in the higher nature of human beings. 
As we are confined to the world of sense, this higher nature expresses 
itself in an endless longing. Philosophical eros ranges from the love 
of beautiful shapes through different stages to knowledge of the 
ideas. But our knowledge, even at this highest level, remains only 
a hypothesis. Although it has as its object the unchanging essences 
that are realized in the actual world, it never comprehends the 
causal nexus that stretches from the highest good to the singular 
things in which we intuit the eternal. In this great yearning that our 
knowledge is never able to satisfy lies the starting point for an inner 
relationship between philosophy and a religiosity that lives in the 
fullness of the divine.
The other aspect of philosophy contained in the Socratic- 
Platonic conception refers to its positive achievement. The inclusion 
of this aspect had an even greater influence. Philosophy stands for 
the movement toward knowledge— knowledge in its most rigorous 
form as science. Universal validity, determinateness, and a regress to 
the justificatory grounds of all assumptions were here put forth for 
348
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
182 
IV
the first time as requirements for all knowledge. The point was to 
put an end to the restless and fanciful play of metaphysical hypoth-
eses as well as to the skepticism of enlightenment. Both Socrates 
and Plato’s first dialogues extended philosophical reflection to the 
overall scope of knowledge in conscious opposition to limiting it 
to cognizing what is actual. Such reflection about knowledge also 
encompasses the determination of values, rules, and purposes. This 
approach was astonishing in its profundity; philosophy is the con-
templative activity that brings all human activity to consciousness 
by elevating it to universally valid knowledge. It is the self- reflection 
of spirit in the form of conceptual thought. The conduct of the war-
rior, the statesman, the poet, or the religious person can only be 
perfected if knowledge of this conduct guides praxis. And because 
all conduct needs to be defined by a purpose, the ultimate purpose 
being eudaemonia, knowledge of eudaemonia and the purposes 
grounded in it as well as the means required by them, are stron-
gest in us. No dark instinct or passion has the power to prevail if 
knowledge shows that eudaemonia is hindered by these dark forces. 
Hence, only the sovereignty of knowledge can raise the individual 
to freedom and society to its own eudaemonia.
Plato’s Socratic dialogues undertook to resolve the problems of 
life on the basis of this Socratic conception of philosophy. But be-
cause life, with its striving for eudaemonia and the inherent power 
of the virtues in which it is actualized, could not be raised to uni-
versally valid knowledge, these dialogues had to end negatively. The 
conflicting tendencies of the Socratic school were insoluble. Plato’s 
Apology acutely and correctly locates them in the person of Socra-
tes: both the way he takes on the task of the universal validity of 
knowledge and how ignorance is nevertheless his final result. This 
concept of philosophy, which aspires to raise being, values, goods, 
purposes, and virtues to the level of knowledge, and so has as its 
object the true, the beautiful, and the good, is the result of philoso-
phy’s first reflection on itself. It had an immeasurable effect and the 
core of the true concept of the essence of philosophy was contained 
in it.
The Socratic- Platonic concept of philosophy continued to be ef-
fective in Aristotle’s classification of philosophy. For him, philoso-
phy is divided into theoretical, poietic, and practical science. It is 
theoretical when its principle and goal is cognition, poietic when its 
principle lies in the artistic capacity that aims to produce a work, 
and practical when its principle is the will and its goal is action as 
such. The poietic, to be sure, does not just comprise the theory of 
349
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
183
art, but rather every kind of knowledge of the technical that does 
not have its goal in the energy of the person but in the production 
of an external work.
But Aristotle did not really structure his philosophy in terms of 
this division stemming from Plato. With Aristotle, a modified con-
ception came to prevail. For him, philosophy is no longer the highest 
enhancement of personality and human society through knowledge. 
Philosophy seeks knowledge for its own sake. For Aristotle, the 
philosophical attitude is characterized by the theoretical perspec-
tive of consciousness. Just as the changing, but rationally ordered 
actual world is grounded in the unchanging and blessed thought 
of a God with no goal and no object outside itself, so finally the 
highest among these changing actualities, human reason, has its ul-
timate function in the purely theoretical attitude as the happiest and 
most perfect for human beings. This is now philosophy for him, for 
it grounds and encompasses all the sciences. It creates a theory of 
knowing as the foundation of every kind of scientific work. Its core 
is a universal science of being: a first philosophy, for which Aristo-
tle’s school formulated the expression “metaphysics.” Finally, the 
system of the sciences, a system that proceeds from the cognition of 
nature to a theory of human beings in order to determine the final 
ends of individuals and society, is based on a teleological concep-
tion of the world formulated in this first philosophy. This new Ar-
istotelian principle of final causality makes it possible to also sub-
ject the changing empirically given actual world to thought. Thus a 
new concept of philosophy emerges that represents the unity of the 
sciences conceptually as an objective system of what is actual that 
extends from the cognition of God to the cognition of the human 
capacity to set ends.
The way the Greeks subordinated the specific sciences to phi-
losophy corresponded to the organization of their philosophical 
schools. These schools were not only centers of discussion concern-
ing principles, but also places where positive research was carried 
out. After a few generations numerous natural sciences and human 
sciences were formed in these schools. There is reason to believe 
that even before Plato there was some type of organization and con-
stancy in the training and common work uniting not only the Py-
thagoreans, but also the students of other earlier thinkers with one 
another. In the clear light of accredited history, the Academy and 
the Peripatetic school stand out as legally organized associations in 
which the unity of their basic philosophical thought holds together 
the different sciences. In these the passion for pure cognition of the 
350
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
184 
IV
truth imparted vitality to each positive effort and its relationship 
to the whole. They provide an unequalled example of the creative 
power that such an organization can have. Plato’s school was for 
some time a center of mathematical and astronomical research. But 
the most enormous scientific effort ever undertaken in such a lim-
ited time and in one place was completed by the group around Ar-
istotle. The basic ideas of teleological structure and of development, 
the method of description, analysis, and comparison led this school 
to establish descriptive and analytic natural sciences as well as pol-
itics and the theory of art.
The Greek concept of philosophy as the all- encompassing sci-
ence found its highest expression in this organization of the philo-
sophical schools. This resulted from that essential aspect of philos-
ophy according to which a common task connects those engaged in 
philosophizing in a common endeavor. For wherever the same goal 
is found in a number of persons, they become interconnected. Phi-
losophy adds to this a binding power that consists in its tendency 
towards universality and universal validity.
The uniform direction of scientific research that we found to be 
most highly developed in the school of Aristotle then disintegrated 
just like Alexander’s empire. The individual sciences gained more in-
dependence as they matured. The bond that had united them broke. 
Alexander’s successors founded institutions outside the philosophi-
cal schools which served the specific concerns of the sciences. This 
was the first factor to change the status of philosophy. The individ-
ual sciences gradually laid claim to the entire realm of the actual 
world in a turn of events that was renewed in modern times. This 
process still has not come to an end. Whenever philosophy has led 
some sphere of research to a state of maturity, this sphere has bro-
ken away on its own. This first happened to philosophy in relation 
to the natural sciences. In modern times the process of differenti-
ation continued: After Grotius, general jurisprudence became an 
independent field of study and after Montesquieu, the comparative 
theory of the state. Today a desire for the emancipation of their 
science is widespread among psychologists, and to the extent that 
the general studies of religion, art, education, and social science 
are based on the study of historical facts and psychology, their 
relation to philosophy must also be called into question. This con-
stantly growing realignment of power relations within the sphere 
of knowledge has imposed on philosophy from outside, as it were, 
the task of drawing anew the boundaries of its domain. But philos-
ophy’s own inner development contained even stronger forces to 
produce this effect.
351
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
185
As the result of the cooperation of these external factors and 
inner forces there arose a change in the position of philosophy that 
emerged with the Skeptics, Epicureans, and Stoics up to the writings 
of Cicero, Lucretius, Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. With 
these new power relationships within the domain of knowledge, the 
failure of metaphysics, the spread of a skeptical spirit, and a turn to 
inwardness among the aging nations all made themselves felt, allow-
ing the philosophy of life to emerge. In it we witness a new stance of 
the philosophical spirit that would be of the greatest importance for 
the future. The concern with great overall systems survived, yet the 
demand for a universally valid solution was treated with less and 
less stringency. The weighing of various [scientific] tasks was subor-
dinated to another task. The problem of the value and purpose of 
life came to take precedence over that of a systematic world order. 
In the Roman- Stoic system, the most influential that the world has 
seen, the power of philosophy to form personal character came to 
the fore. The structure of philosophy, its order, and the relationships 
between its parts all changed. This change in the stance of philos-
ophy was matched by new conceptual definitions. Cicero typifies 
this new turn of philosophy when he calls it the “teacher of life, 
inventor of laws, guide to every virtue,” and Seneca defines it as the 
theory and art of the proper conduct of life. With this, philosophy 
becomes a disposition towards life, not a mere theory, and so “wis-
dom” becomes a favored designation for it. But if we trace this new 
concept of philosophy back to the stance that is expressed in it, we 
see that it developed from within the great metaphysical systems. 
Their problem is merely subjected to new conditions.
For many centuries this feature of philosophy that probes the 
unfathomable depths of the essence of things, led the aging world to 
turn to religion. This caused philosophy to lose its true essence for 
many centuries through the subjugation to religion. The stance that 
philosophy then adopted toward the task of universally valid cog-
nition and the concepts that emerge from it did not belong to the 
true development of its essence. This will be discussed in the theory 
of the intermediaries that link philosophy and religion.
2. The Forms of Philosophy in Modern Times as Expressed in 
the Concepts of Philosophy
The Renaissance in which the secularization of art, literature, and 
a liberal philosophy of life were culturally dominant paved the way 
for the sciences of nature to constitute themselves in a definitive 
fashion. Similarly, the sciences of the social world for the first time 
352
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
186 
IV
gained a kind of a coherence guided by an idea of a natural system. 
As the empirical sciences were undertaking the task of attaining 
cognition by their methods, there arose in the seventeenth century a 
new relationship among the forces in intellectual culture. The cour-
age to strive for strict, universally valid knowledge and the transfig-
uration of the world by means of this knowledge pervaded the lead-
ing nations. The individual sciences and philosophy were conjoined 
in this effort. They strongly opposed religion and left art, literature, 
and the philosophy of life behind. Hence, the goal of objective uni-
versally valid cognition of the world that had governed the great 
systems of antiquity was pursued more methodically and with a 
greater sense of purpose under these new conditions. Accordingly, 
the character and concept of metaphysics changed as well. It pro-
gressed from a naive attitude to the world to confront doubts and 
arrive at a conscious grasp of the relations between thought and the 
world. Accordingly, metaphysics severs itself from the individual 
sciences through its consciousness of its distinctive method. Now it 
finds its proper object in being as such, which is not given to us in 
any particular science. But the methodological demand for rigorous 
universal validity and the progressive self- reflection on the proce-
dure of metaphysics point to a differentiating feature of its modern 
development. The demand for rigor links it with the mathematical 
natural sciences while the methodological character of universality 
and of unconditional grounding separates it. The task then is to 
determine the procedure that is appropriate to this new method-
ological consciousness.
a) The New Concept of Metaphysics.
After founding mechanics, Descartes immediately undertook to use 
his new constructive method to define the essence of philosophy. 
The first characteristic of this method, as opposed to that of the 
individual sciences, lay in the general approach to the problem and 
the attempt to derive the initial basic assumptions of the sciences 
from a highest principle. This brought out basic traits inherent in the 
essence of philosophy, bringing them to fuller expression than ever 
before by any earlier system. But its distinctive brilliance lay in the 
method of its execution. The mathematical natural sciences contain 
presuppositions that lie outside the special domains of mathemat-
ics, mechanics, and astronomy. If these are formulated in evident 
concepts and propositions and if we grasp the justification of their 
objective validity, then we can base a constructive procedure on 
353
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
187
them. This provides the mechanical point of view with its reliability 
and the possibility of further expansion. Descartes maintained this 
over against Galileo and saw in this the superiority of the philoso-
pher over the physicist. Hobbes and Spinoza then made use of the 
same constructive procedure. Spinoza’s new pantheistic system of 
the identity of spirit and nature results from the application of this 
method to the actual world, whose given properties are naturally 
always presupposed. It is an interpretation of the actual world as 
it is given in experience, on the basis of simple evident truths. This 
metaphysics of identity provides the foundation for the doctrine of 
the causal nexus of psychic states, leading from our bondage to the 
passions to freedom. Leibniz, finally, carried this method further 
than anyone else. He occupied himself until his death with the Her-
culean effort of developing his new universal logic as the founda-
tion of constructive procedure. Delineating philosophy by means of 
the criterion of method has survived in the systems of metaphysics 
since the seventeenth century.
The constructive method of these thinkers succumbed to the cog-
nitive critiques of Locke, Hume, and Kant, even though foundations 
for a theory of knowledge can be found in Leibniz that have been 
fully appreciated only in recent times. To infer objective validity from 
the evidence of simple concepts and propositions proved to be un-
tenable. The categories of substance, causality, and purpose were 
[now] derived from the conditions of perceptual consciousness. Even 
though the reliability of mathematics had been used to guarantee this 
constructive philosophical method, Kant pointed out the distinctive 
foundation for mathematical evidence in intuition. The constructive 
method also proved to be insufficient in the human sciences. Juris-
prudence and natural theology showed that it could not do justice 
to the fullness of the historical world, either in thought or in politi-
cal action. As a result, if one did not want to discard every method 
proper to metaphysics, its procedure had to be restructured. And 
Kant himself, who overthrew the constructive method in philosophy, 
also discovered the means for such a restructuring. He regarded the 
method that he designated as transcendental as the most distinctive 
aspect of his life’s work— and because he saw this as philosophy’s 
main task, it was also most distinctive for philosophy itself. The edi-
fice that he sought to build with it was supposed to have as its foun-
dation the truths found by means of it. In this sense, he retained the 
term “metaphysics.” He also grasped the content of the new principle 
upon which Schelling, Schleiermacher, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Fechner, 
and Lotze founded metaphysics.
354
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
188 
IV
According to the great insight of modern philosophy founded 
upon the epistemology of Locke, Hume, and Kant, the external 
world is only there for us as a phenomenon. Reality is only given to 
us in the facts of consciousness (immediately according to the En-
glish thinkers; subject to the conditions of consciousness according 
to Kant). The decisive new feature of Kant’s viewpoint is that this 
reality is a mental <spiritual> nexus, and all the connectedness of 
the external world derives from it. The simple concepts and prop-
ositions at the basis of constructive philosophy are therefore only 
elements of this nexus that have been isolated by the intellect and 
abstractly formulated. Modern German metaphysics started from 
this conception of Kant. German metaphysicians from Schelling to 
Schopenhauer were contemptuous of intellectual reflection for be-
ing content to use mere elements— substances, causal relations, and 
purposes— that had been abstracted from a living whole. With their 
new method proceeding from a holistic mental nexus, meta physics 
could finally do justice to the human sciences, which had become 
superficial and trivial through the use of concepts of reflection. It 
was this assumption of a spiritual nexus that led from the concept 
of evolution as confirmed by the experience of the natural world to 
fruitful insights into development. It was the last and most perfect 
attempt to develop a specifically philosophical method. An attempt 
of gigantic proportions! But it too had to fail. It is true that con-
sciousness provides the possibility to grasp the systematic order of 
the world. And at least the formal operations by means of which it 
provides this order possess the character of necessity. But even this 
metaphysical method could not find the bridge that leads from ne-
cessity as a fact of our consciousness to objective validity. It sought 
in vain for a path that led from the nexus of consciousness to the 
insight that in this we are given the inner link of what is actual.
So the possibilities of metaphysical method were probed in Ger-
many, one after another, and always with the same negative result. 
Among these, two [groups] strove for supremacy during the nine-
teenth century. Schelling, Schleiermacher, Hegel, and Schopenhauer 
proceeded from the nexus of consciousness, and each discovered on 
this basis his principle of the universe. Relying on Herbart,1 Lotze 
and Fechner began with the constellation of experiences given in con-
sciousness and undertook to prove that non- contradictory conceptual 
1 Johann F. Herbart (1776– 1841), German philosopher and early Neo- Kantian 
who attempted to reform epistemology in relation to psychology.
355
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
189
cognition of this given is only possible by reducing the given world 
of sense to spiritual facts and their relations. The first group began 
with the views of Kant and Fichte, who wanted to elevate philos-
ophy to a universally valid science. The second went back to Leib-
niz, for whom the explanation of the world could only be a well- 
grounded hypothesis. The most powerful thinkers within the first 
group, Schelling and Hegel, took as their starting point Fichte’s the-
sis that the universally valid systematic unity of consciousness man-
ifested in the empirical ego brings forth the systematic coherence 
of the universe. This thesis was itself a false interpretation of the 
contents found in consciousness. By taking the nexus of conscious-
ness, as the condition of how the world appears in consciousness 
and transforming it into that of the universe itself so as to make 
the pure ego the ground of the world, they transcended all possible 
experience. In the restless dialectic leading from Fichte’s and Schell-
ing’s intellectual intuition to Hegel’s dialectical method, they sought 
in vain for a procedure that could show the identity of the logical 
nexus with the nature of things, of the nexus of consciousness with 
that of the universe. The contradiction between the objective nexus 
of things in the world as they found it and the order of things ac-
cording to laws as they were established by sciences of experience 
was to have a destructive effect. The other direction of thought, 
however, led by Lotze and Fechner, who based themselves on Her-
bart, wanted to show how the given could be consistently brought 
to conceptual cognition by means of the hypothesis of a spiritual 
nexus, fell nonetheless into an inner dialectic that was equally de-
structive. The way from the manifold of what is given in experience 
back to the origins of all things by means of concepts that cannot 
be verified by any intuition, led Lotze and Fechner into a night in 
which real things and monads, the temporal and the atemporal, 
a universal consciousness as well as an unconscious could all be 
found by efforts of speculative profundity. They heaped up hypoth-
eses about what is inaccessible to experience and could find neither 
firm support nor opposition there: One complex of hypotheses was 
just as possible as another. How could this metaphysics have ful-
filled its task of providing the life of individuals and society security 
and stability in the great crises of the century!
And so this last and most ambitious attempt of human spirit also 
failed to find a philosophical method that is distinct from the pro-
cedure of the sciences of experience and yet able to provide a basis 
for a metaphysics. It is not possible to take the understanding of 
356
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
190 
IV
the world as it is given in experience and as it is cognized by means 
of the individual sciences and deepen it by using a metaphysical 
method that differs from their way of proceeding.
b) New Non- Metaphysical Definitions of the   
Essence of Philosophy.
The task of finding a concept of philosophy’s essence able to assert 
its independent significance over against the individual sciences has 
produced an inner dialectic that drives thought to other possibili-
ties. If no method can be found that insures metaphysics its right to 
exist along with the sciences of experience, then philosophy must 
find other ways to satisfy the spiritual need for universality, for 
foundations, and for grasping reality. The view point of skepticism 
must also be overcome in this new state of research. Looking to-
ward the future, philosophy seeks for a response of consciousness 
to the given that can do justice to the situation created by the newly 
established experiential sciences. And when a method cannot be 
found that creates for philosophy an object of its own, a being, such 
as substance, God, or soul, from which the results of the particu-
lar sciences could be derived, the possibility presents itself at first 
of proceeding from the objective cognitive results of the particular 
sciences to ground them in an epistemology or theory of cognition.
There is one domain that undeniably belongs to philosophy. If 
the individual sciences have divided up among themselves the realm 
of the given actual world so that each treats of a particular part, 
there then arises a new realm: these sciences themselves. Attention 
is shifted from what is actual to our knowledge of it, and here a 
domain is found that lies beyond the individual sciences. Ever since 
this awareness has appeared on the horizon of human thought, it 
has been recognized as the domain of philosophy: the theory of 
theories, logic, epistemology. If this domain is grasped in its entirety, 
then philosophy appropriates the whole theory of the grounding of 
knowledge in a domain that encompasses the cognition of what is 
actual, the determining of values, the setting of goals, and the gen-
eration of rules. In this way the whole scope of knowledge is philos-
ophy’s object and falling under this the relations of the individual 
sciences to one another, their inner order, according to which each 
new one presupposes earlier ones and builds on them with the facts 
from its own domain of inquiry. As a result of the epistemological 
point of view, the search for foundations and interconnectedness 
also grows within the individual sciences themselves. This is culti-
vated by the social character of scientific inquiry in the universities 
357
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
191
and the academies. The task and significance of philosophy in these 
institutions is to keep this spirit alive.
The classical representative of this epistemological grounding of 
the [experiential] empirical sciences themselves is Helmholtz. He 
justified philosophy’s right to exist along with the particular sci-
ences by claiming that its subject matter is knowledge. Philosophy 
will always have as its necessary business “to investigate the sources 
of our knowledge and the measure of its justification.”2 “Philosophy 
has great significance for the sphere of the sciences as the doctrine 
of the sources of knowledge and the activities of knowing in the sense 
that Kant and, insofar as I have understood him, the elder Fichte 
conceived it.”3
Although the essential task of philosophy was transferred to 
epistemology or the theory of cognition, philosophy’s relationship 
to its basic problem was still preserved. Epistemology arose from a 
critical analysis of claims to possess objective cognition of what it is 
that grounds the world and how it coheres as a total system, [what 
are its] highest value and ultimate purpose. From the futile efforts of 
metaphysics came the investigation of the bounds of human knowl-
edge. Gradually, in the course of its development, epistemology en-
compassed the most universal stance of consciousness to what it is 
given, so that it also most perfectly expresses our relationship to the 
riddle of the world and of life. It is the stance that Plato had already 
adopted. Philosophy involves reflection about all the general atti-
tudes that characterize the human spirit, and this reflection may not 
stop short of questioning their ultimate presuppositions. Kant gave 
philosophy the same status as Plato. The breadth of Kant’s vision 
is shown in the fact that his critique and grounding of knowledge 
covers not only the cognition of what is actual, but also the judging 
of aesthetic values, the assessment of the teleological principle as a 
way of viewing the world, and the universally valid grounding of 
ethical rules. And just as every philosophical viewpoint for grasp-
ing the world strives to also establish rules of action, so too this 
epistemological approach, in its greatest representatives, developed 
philosophy’s practical, reformatory influence, and its power to cul-
tivate the ideal of the person. Kant had already explained that the 
2 Hermann von Helmholtz, Über das Sehen des Menschen (Leipzig: Leopold 
Voss, 1855), 5.
3 Letter from Helmholtz to his father, cited in Friedrich Conrat, Hermann von 
Helmholtz‘ psychologische Anschauungen (Halle: Verlag von Max Niemeyer, 1904), 
256.
358
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
192 
IV
concept of philosophy as seeking the goal of the logical perfection of 
cognition is only an academic concept; “but there is also a worldly 
concept (conceptus cosmicus) of philosophy . . . according to which 
it is the science of the relation of all cognition to the essential ends 
of human reason.”4 The task now, to use Kant’s language, is to find 
the connection between the academic concept of philosophy and its 
worldly concept, and today’s Neo- Kantian school has done justice 
to this demand in some excellent studies.
Another non- metaphysical approach to philosophy arose among 
individual researchers themselves. They were satisfied with a con-
ceptual description of the phenomenal world and with the verifica-
tion of its lawful order by experimental testing and by confirming 
effects that had been previously calculated upon the basis of theory. 
If epistemology begins with the positivity of the results of the in-
dividual sciences, it is not able to add to them any new objective 
cognitive gains, nor is it able to find any new ways of grounding 
them. Yet it may still hold on to the positive character of the results 
of these sciences and find the stable point sought for by those recent 
philosophers who are practi cally satisfied with their conception of 
the given and renounce as fruitless all reflection on its universal va-
lidity. And if we follow the long chains of reasoning and the difficul-
ties of forming concepts in epistemology, and the disputes among 
the factions in this field, we then have weighty motives for deciding 
in favor of this new attitude. Accordingly, philosophy shifts its at-
tention to the logical system of the sciences. With this new stand-
point, philosophy appears to have finally achieved an objective con-
ception of the world free from metaphysical and epistemological 
investigations. While the experiential sciences investigate specific 
parts or aspects of the actual world, philosophy is left the task of 
discerning the inner connections among the individual sciences that 
allow us to cognize the totality of what is actual.
Hereby it becomes an encyclopedia of the sciences in a higher, 
philosophical sense. Ever since the sciences acquired their auton-
omy in later antiquity there have been encyclopedias. They were 
advanced by the activities of the schools, and there was a need for 
an inventory of the great works of the ancient world. What is im-
portant for us here is that since the invasion of the northern peoples 
and the end of the Western Roman Empire, the German and Roman 
states began to build on the basis of the ancient world’s culture by 
4 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A838/B866–A839/B867.
359
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
193
means of encyclopedias. Beginning with Martianus Capella,5 such 
encyclopedic works have kept alive, albeit in a crude fashion, an-
cient thinking about how to represent the world in the sciences. In 
the three great works of Vincent of Beauvais,6 such a concept of 
the encyclopedia was most perfectly fulfilled. From this process of 
producing inventories of knowledge, which con tinued throughout 
the Middle Ages, came the modern philosophical encyclopedia. Its 
foundational work stems from Lord Chancellor Bacon. Beginning 
with him, the encyclopedia consciously strove to discover the prin-
ciple of the interconnectedness of the sciences. Hobbes discovered 
it first in the natural order of the sciences according to which one 
science is the presupposition of others. D’Alembert and Turgot then 
methodically applied the con cept of philosophy as a universal sci-
ence in the French Encyclopedia. Finally, Comte presented positive 
philosophy as the system of the inner relations of the sciences ac-
cording to their systematic and historical dependence on one an-
other: a system culminating in sociology. A methodological analy-
sis of the individual sciences was made on this basis. The structure 
of every science was examined, the presuppositions contained in 
each was identified, and from this the principle of the relationships 
among the sciences was determined. At the same time, it could be 
shown how new methods arose in the progression from one science 
to another. In this way, finally, sociology was furthered and meth-
odologically defined as the true work of philosophy. This brought 
to completion the system of the sciences, developed from their nat-
ural tendency to distinguish themselves from one another, without 
bringing in a general epistemological foundation, resulting hence 
in a positive philosophy. It was a significant attempt to constitute 
philosophy as the immanent nexus of the objective cognition of 
things. This positivistic conception of philosophy proceeds from the 
rigorous conception of universally valid knowledge of the mathe-
matical natural sciences, and its further significance for philosoph-
ical thought lies in its bringing to bear the demands arising from 
such a conception, purifying the sciences from every indemonstra-
ble excess resulting from metaphysical conceptions. But because of 
its inner opposition to meta physics, this new philosophical position 
is still historically tied to metaphysics. Moreover, by aiming for a 
5 Martianus Capella, fifth- century writer, who was one of the first to formulate 
the system of the seven liberal arts.
6 Vincent of Beauvais, Dominican friar of the thirteenth century, whose Specu-
lum Maius (The Greater Mirror) summed up the knowledge of the Middle Ages.
360
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
194 
IV
universal, generally valid comprehension of the world, this branch 
of philosophy remains connected with its trunk.
But this second non- metaphysical attitude of philo sophical 
thought extends far beyond the sphere of positivism. Because pos-
itivism subordinates the facts of human culture to the cognition of 
nature, it mixes in a world- view that makes it a specific doctrine 
within this new philosophical standpoint. We find the same stand-
point to also be widespread without the world- view supplement of 
positivism; it is found among many of the outstanding researchers 
in the field of the human sciences. It is especially influential in po-
litical science and jurisprudence. The imperatives imposed upon the 
citizens of a state by legislation can be reduced to an interpretation 
of how the will is expressed in them and to logical analysis and 
historical explanation without any recourse to universal prin ciples 
such as the idea of justice as the foundation of positive law and the 
assessment of its correctness. Such an attitude reveals a philosophi-
cal standpoint related to positivism.
This second anti- metaphysical philosophical attitude, as a posi-
tivistic conception of the actual world, finds the limits of its power— 
although it is still extensive, especially in present- day France— in 
the inability of its phenomenal mode of interpreting things to do 
justice to the reality of historical consciousness and collective life- 
values. By the same token, this philosophical standpoint, as a positive 
interpretation of the legal order, is incapable of providing a foun-
dation for ideals that could act as guides in an age directed to the 
trans formation of society.
The epistemological movement sought the distinctive feature of 
philosophy in its methodological attitude on which it based meth-
odological self- reflection and a search for the ultimate presupposi-
tions of philosophy’s further advance. Positivistic thinking, on the 
other hand, sought the distinctive feature of philosophy in its func-
tion within the system of the sciences and carried on philosophy’s 
search for univer sality within this context. This still left philosophy 
with the possibility of seeking its special subject matter in a way 
that could satisfy its effort to grasp what is real. Since all attempts 
to penetrate what is truly real by means of metaphysics have failed, 
the reality of consciousness as a fact emerged all the more strongly. 
The reality of conscious ness is given to us in inner experience 
and, with it, the possibility of more deeply cognizing the source 
of the manifold products of the human spirit as they are grasped 
by the human sciences. Inner experience is the starting point for 
logic, epistemology, and every theory of the generation of a unitary 
361
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
195
world- view; it also provides the basis for psychology, aesthetics, 
ethics, and related disciplines. This whole domain has always been 
designated as philosophical. This state of affairs provides the basis 
for the view that conceives the essence of philosophy as the science 
of inner experience or as a spiritual/human science.
This standpoint developed after the theory of associa tion was 
elaborated in eighteenth- century psychology, providing it with an 
empirical basis and a wide range of applications in epistemology, 
aesthetics, and ethics. David Hume, in his main work on human 
nature locates true philosophy in the experientially grounded study 
of human beings. His repudiation of metaphysics, coupled with the 
founding of epistemology exclusively on the new [associationist] 
psychology, in which he at the same time finds the ex planatory prin-
ciples of the human sciences, gave rise to a new system of the hu-
man sciences founded upon inner experience. After the creation of 
the natural sciences, this system, with the theory of human beings 
as its focus, became the other and greater task for the human spirit. 
Among those who subsequently contributed to these efforts were 
Adam Smith, Jeremy Bentham, James Mill, John Stuart Mill, and 
Alexander Bain. Like Hume, John Stuart Mill wanted to conceive 
philosophy as the scientific cognizance of man as an intellectual, 
moral, and social creature. In Germany, Beneke7 upheld the same 
standpoint. He adopted it from the English and Scottish school, and 
only in regard to its execution is he indebted to Herbart.8 In this 
sense he declared in his Foundation of the Physics of Morals: “If my 
view becomes accepted, then philosophy as a whole will become 
the natural science of the human soul.”9 He was guided by the great 
truth that inner experience exhibits to us something completely real 
in the life of the soul, whereas the external world given through 
the senses is only a phenomenon. And he shows in his Pragmatic 
Psychology how “everything that lies before us as an object for our 
cognition in logic, morality, aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, 
even in metaphysics itself,” can be clearly and deeply grasped only 
if “we conceive it according to the basic developmental laws of the 
7 Friedrich Eduard Beneke (1798– 1854), German philosopher and psychologist 
who argued that inductive psychology provided the foundation for all philosophical 
disciplines.
8 Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776– 1841), German philosopher who focused on 
pedagogical guidelines.
9 Beneke, Grundlegung zur Physik der Sitten: ein Gegenstück zu Grundlegung 
zur Kants Metaphysik der Sitten (Berlin: In Commision bei E. G Mittler, 1822), x.
362
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
196 
IV
human soul as they are set forth in their most systematic form by 
(theoretical) psychology.”10 Among later thinkers, Theodor Lipps11 
has explicitly defined philosophy in his Basic Facts of Psychic Life 
as a “human science” or the science of inner experience.
The great service performed by these thinkers for the develop-
ment of the human sciences cannot be doubted. Only after the foun-
dational position of psychology in this area was recognized and 
psychological cognition applied to the particular human sciences, 
have they begun to meet the demand for universally valid knowl-
edge. But philosophy’s new standpoint as the science of inner ex-
perience could not answer the question of the universal validity of 
scientific knowledge, and its limited horizon did not permit it to do 
justice to the questions rightfully posed by positivism. Hence, The-
odor Lipps also went on to adopt a new version of his standpoint.
This conception of philosophy creates a very significant relation 
between this third non- metaphysical attitude of philosophy and 
its traditional metaphysical problems, a relationship confirmed by 
both nomenclature and the course of history. The natural sciences 
select only partial contents of lived experience that can serve to 
determine changes in the physical world that is independent of us. 
Thus natural science is only concerned with what are appearances 
for consciousness. The object of the human sciences, by contrast, is 
the reality of lived experiences themselves as given in inner experi-
ence. Here, therefore, we possess a reality that is lived— admittedly 
only as lived experience— and which it is philosophy’s unending 
yearning to grasp. We see here how even this attempt to delimit the 
concept of philosophy preserves the connection between its essence 
and its original basic problem.
3. Conclusion Concerning the Essence of Philosophy
On the one hand, the result our historical survey is negative. In each 
of the definitions of the concept of philosophy there appeared only 
one aspect of its essential concept. Each one of them was only the 
expression of a standpoint assumed by philosophy in the course of 
its development. It expressed what one or several thinkers thought 
was possible in a specific situation or demanded by philosophy as 
its task. Each of them defined a particular sphere of phenomena as 
10 Beneke, Pragmatische Psychologie: über Seelenlehre in der Anwendung auf 
das Leben, vol. 1 (Berlin:E. G. Mittler & Sohn, 1850), 17.
11 Theodor Lipps (1851– 1914), best known for his theory of empathy (Ein-
fühlung) and its application to aesthetic experience.
363
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
197
philosophy and excluded other phenomena designated as philosophy. 
The great oppositions between these standpoints as they asserted 
themselves with equal force gain expression in the different con-
cepts of philosophy. Each claims to be equally justified over against 
the others. And the conflict can only be settled by finding a stand-
point above the parties.
The point of view from which these different conceptual determi-
nations of philosophy were formulated was that of systematic phi-
losophers who use their overall system to definitively express what 
seems to them to be a valuable and soluble task. They are thereby 
doubtless within their rights to define their own philosophy. They do 
not deny that philosophy in the course of its history has also posed 
other tasks for itself, but they declare those solutions to be either 
impossible or without value, so that philosophy’s efforts in those di-
rections seem to be enduring illusions. Insofar as a particular philos-
opher is clear about this sense of his definition there can be no doubt 
as to the justifica tion of his limitation of philosophy to epistemology 
or to the sciences founded on inner experience or the sys tematic or-
der of the sciences in which cognition is actually realized.
The task of defining the essence of philosophy, which is to clarify 
how the term has been used and how individual philosophers have 
conceived of it, leads by necessity from the systematic to the histor-
ical point of view. The task is not to determine what counts here or 
now as philosophy, but what always and everywhere constitutes its 
subject matter. All the specific concepts of philosophy only point to-
ward this universal content, which makes it possible to explain the 
manifold manifestations of philosophy and the differences in how it 
is conceived. The superiority of this historical standpoint is proven 
by the fact that it permits us to understand the necessity of the 
self- certainty with which these individual systems appear and make 
their pronouncements about philosophy. Viewed historically, each 
solution of a philosophical problem belongs to a particular time 
and a particular situation. Human beings as creatures of the time 
in which they work find their security by raising what they create 
above the flux of time as something enduring. While under this illu-
sion, they create more joyfully and powerfully. Herein lies the eter-
nal contradiction between creative minds and historical conscious-
ness. It is natural for creative minds to forget what no longer is and 
to ignore what might be better in the future; but historical con-
sciousness draws on the gathered presence of all times, and it per-
ceives in all individual creations a co- given relativity and transience. 
This contradiction is the quietly endured burden most characteristic 
of contemporary philosophy. The contemporary philosopher’s own 
364
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
198 
IV
creativity merges with historical consciousness because without this 
his philosophy would only encompass a fragment of what is actual. 
He must know that his creative work is only a part of a historical 
nexus within which he brings about something that is limited. Then 
he will be able to resolve this contradiction, as we will see later. He 
can now give himself over to the power of historical consciousness, 
even viewing his daily efforts under the standpoint of the histori-
cal nexus in which the essence of philosophy unfolds in its various 
manifold forms.
 From this historical standpoint, each particular concept of phi-
losophy becomes an instance that refers to the formative law gov-
erning the content of philosophy. No matter how untenable each of 
the definitions of the concept of philosophy attempted from the sys-
tematic standpoint may be, they are nonetheless all important for 
the resolution of the question of the essence of philosophy. For they 
are an essential part of the historical facts from which we now draw 
our conclusions.
To reach a conclusion, we gather all the empirical data that we 
have considered. The name “philosophy” proved to be applied to 
the most varied state of affairs. We saw that the essence of philos-
ophy was exceedingly changeable, always setting itself new tasks 
and adjusting itself to the conditions of culture. It conceives certain 
problems as worthwhile and then dis cards them. At one cognitive 
level, questions seem soluble to it, and then it later drops them as 
insoluble. But we always saw in it the same tendency towards uni-
versality, towards grounding, the same direction of mind towards 
the whole of the given world. All the while, the metaphysical urge 
to penetrate the core of this whole vies with the positivistic demand 
for the universal validity of knowledge. These are the two sides of 
philosophy’s essence that dis tinguish it from even the most closely 
related spheres of culture. In contrast to the particular sciences, it 
strives to solve the very riddle of the world and life. And in contrast 
to art and religion, it seeks to provide this solution in a way that is 
universally valid. For this is the main result of the historical facts we 
have been discussing: a consistent, self- contained historical nexus 
leads from the metaphysical cognition of the Greeks, which under-
took to resolve the riddle of the world and life in a way that was 
universally valid, to the most radical positivists or skeptics in the 
present age; everything that takes place in philosophy is determined 
in some way by this starting point and its basic problem. Philoso-
phy runs through all the ways that it is possible for the human spirit 
to respond to the riddle of the world and life.
365
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
199
In this historical nexus, the task and achievement of each partic-
ular philosophical position is to actualize one such possibility under 
given condi tions. Each brought to expression an essential feature 
of philosophy, and at the same time its limitations pointed to the 
teleological nexus that conditions it as a part of a whole in which 
alone the complete truth is found. This complex historical state of 
affairs is explained by the fact that [in addition] to what philoso-
phy contributes on its own, it performs a derivative function in the 
purposive system of society. The way that philosophy fulfills this 
function in its different phases is determined by its relationship to 
the whole as well as to the state of culture according to time and 
place, life- relationships, and personality. Hence, philosophy does 
not allow for a rigid definition on the basis of a specific subject mat-
ter or a specific method.
This state of affairs that informs the essence of philosophy binds 
together all philosophical thinkers. Here we find the explanation 
for an essential feature that confronted us in the different manifes-
tations of philosophy. We saw that the name “philosophy” desig-
nates something that recurs uniformly and is always there whenever 
this name is used. But at the same time, it involves the inner con-
nectedness of those who participate in it. If philosophy is a function 
that fulfills a particular purpose in society, it places those in whom 
this purpose lives into an inner relationship. The leaders of phil-
osophical schools are bound this way with their followers. In the 
academies that have emerged since the founding of the particular 
sciences, we find these sciences engaged in common efforts, recipro-
cally completing each other, led by the idea of the unity of knowl-
edge. Consciousness of this connectedness is embodied in philoso-
phers such as Plato, Aristotle, and Leibniz. Finally, in the eighteenth 
century the universities became instruments for the organization of 
the joint effort of the sciences in which teachers were bound to one 
another and to their students. In the universities too, philosophy 
had the function of keeping alive a consciousness of the ground, 
overall coherence, and goal of knowledge. All these organizations 
are included in the inner purposive system in which, beginning with 
Thales and Pythagoras, one thinker transmits problems to others 
and truths are passed on. Possibilities for the solution of problems 
are thought through successively: World- views are advanced and 
refined. Great thinkers actively influence every subsequent age.
366
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
3. The Connecting Links between Philosophy and 
Religiosity, Literature, and Poetry
The systems of the great thinkers by which philosophy manifests 
itself preeminently and indubitably, as well as the historical nexus 
of these systems, have led us to a seminal insight into the function of 
philosophy. But we cannot yet account for the use of the terms “phi-
losophy” and “philosophical” on the basis of this function. These 
terms are also attached to phenomena that are not determined ex-
clusively by this function of philosophy. We must enlarge our horizon 
in order to explain these facts.
The affinity of philosophy with religion, literature and poetry 
has always been noticed. An inner relationship to the riddle of the 
world and life is common to all three of them. And so the terms 
“philosophy” and “philosophical” or related ones are applied to 
intellectual constellations in the field of religiosity as well as to the 
experience and conduct of life, literary activity, and poetry.
The Greek apologists simply call Christianity philosophy. Ac-
cording to Justin,1 Christ, as the human embodiment of divine rea-
son, definitively solves the questions that the true philosophers have 
struggled with. And for Minucius Felix,2 philosophy, which finds its 
fulfillment in Christianity, consists of eternal truths about God, hu-
man responsibility, and immortality, which are founded on reason 
and can be proved by means of reason. Christians, he says, are the 
(true) philosophers today, and philosophers of pagan times were in 
effect Christians. Another very significant Christian group desig-
nates the knowledge that fulfills faith as “gnosis.” Heretical gnosis 
has its roots in the experience of the moral power of Christianity to 
liberate the soul from the senses, and it gives a metaphysical inter-
pretation of this experience in historical religious intuitions. Within 
the Church, Clement of Alexander conceives of an [ecclesiastical] 
gnosis that elevates Christian faith to the level of knowledge and 
can be granted the right to interpret the higher meaning of Holy 
Scripture. In the treatise De Principiis, an ecclesiastically elaborated 
system, Origen3 defines gnosis as the procedure that can ground the 
truths contained in the tradition of the apostles. At the same time 
Greco- Roman speculation provided an analogous connecting link 
1 Justin Martyr (ca. 100— ca. 165), Greek theologian. One of the Church Fathers.
2 Marcus Minucius Felix, one of the earliest of the Latin apologists for Christianity.
3 Origen (c. 185– c. 253), a Christian exegete and theologian, who made copious 
use of the allegorical method in his commentaries.
367
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   200
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
201
in Neo- Platonism. Here the philo sophical impulse finds its ultimate 
satisfaction in a mystical union with the divine, namely, in a reli-
gious experiential process. Therefore, Porphyry4 views the motive 
and goal of philosophy as the salvation of the soul, and Proclus5 
prefers to use the term “theology” for his thought rather than “phi-
losophy.” The intellectual means through which religion and philos-
ophy are to be brought to an inner unity are the same in all these 
systems. The first is the doctrine of the logos. In the divine unity 
there is a power to impart itself so that philosophical and religious 
forms of communication are seen to proceed from it as essentially 
related. Another such means of thought is allegorical interpretation. 
By means of it, particular and historical aspects of religious belief 
and Holy Scripture are elevated to a universal world- view. In the 
systems themselves, philosophical impulse and religious belief, in-
tellectual grounding and mystical union with the Godhead, are so 
intimately connected with each  other that the religious and philo-
sophical appear to be aspects of the same process. For in this period 
of struggle among the religions, the rise of significant personalities 
suggests the creative idea that there is a general type of developmen-
tal history for higher souls. The highest forms of medieval mysti-
cism depend on this development so that here too these two spheres 
are not merely run together but form a profound inner nexus from 
the psychological point of view. These spiritual developments pro-
duced radical terminological changes allowing Jakob Böhme to call 
his life’s work a “holy philosophy.”
While all these facts point to an inner relationship between re-
ligiosity and philosophy, this becomes even clearer as it becomes 
obvious that the history of philosophy cannot exclude such inter-
mediate forms that fall between philosophy and religiosity. These 
have a place in the progression from life- experience to psychologi-
cal consciousness of it as well as in the genesis and development of a 
view of life. Hence, this intermediate phase between religiosity and 
philosophy makes it necessary to go behind the essential features 
of philosophy established so far to discern contexts whose scope is 
both broader and deeper.
This same necessity arises when we consider the relations that 
exist to life- experience, literature, and poetry as they influence their 
4 Porphyry (c. 234— c. 305), a Neoplatonic philosopher who edited and pub-
lished the Enneads of Plotinus.
5 Proclus (412– 485 C.E.), a philosopher of late antiquity who played a crucial 
role in the transmission of Platonic philosophy from antiquity to the Middle Ages.
368
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   201
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
202 
IV
historical context and how things are named and concepts defined. 
Literary figures who strive to move the public through an unas-
sailable point of view join with those who proceed purely on the 
basis of philosophical research. Both are unconcerned with system- 
building and manifest a common desire to ground and express the 
knowledge of life in a way that is more free and humane.
Lessing can be seen as a representative of the first group of liter-
ary figures. He was a naturally born writer. As a young man he took 
notice of philosophical systems, but did not think of taking sides 
in the disputes between them. Yet each of the small and great tasks 
that he took upon himself required him to search for fixed concepts 
and truths. Whoever wants to lead the reading public must himself 
know where he is going. In this way Lessing was led from limited 
tasks to problems of an ever- greater kind. Without doing the sys-
tematic work of philosophers, he solved these problems through the 
power contained in his own essential being, as it had been shaped 
by the times. An ideal of life arose in him out of life itself. The 
doctrine of determinism came to him from the philosophy around 
him, and the people he knew so well confirmed it. On this basis, 
he came in his theological writings to a particular notion of divine 
power that grounds the necessary order of things. This and other 
considerations gave his ideas a kind of inner structure that is very 
different from the essential characteristics of philosophy as we have 
characterized them so far. And yet nobody hesitates to speak of Less-
ing’s philo sophy. He adopts a definite standpoint in the history of 
this sphere of life and claims it as his own. All the literary figures 
for whom he is representative point to an intermediate sphere that 
combines philosophy and literature.
This very same intermediate sphere also includes the other group 
that left systematic philosophy behind in order to solve the riddle of 
life and the world by means of a more subjective, less formal way 
of thinking. This group occupies a prominent place in the history of 
the human spirit. This is especially the case whenever an epoch of 
systematic thinking has ended and the values of life that had been 
validated by that epoch are no longer appropriate for the changed 
human state of affairs, and whenever carefully and subtly devel-
oped conceptual cognition of the world is no longer sufficient to 
deal with new facts revealed by experience. In situations of this 
kind, such thinkers come on the scene and proclaim a new day in 
the life of philosophy. We see this in the philosophers of the Roman 
Stoic school, who used their concern with the philosophy of action 
to throw off the weight of Greek systematic thought and make their 
goal a freer interpretation of life. Marcus Aurelius, who found the 
369
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
203
most congenial style for this kind of thought in his Meditations, 
sees the essence of philosophy in a life- attitude that follows the God 
within us, raising us above the violence and squalor of the world. 
Yet these thinkers had a firm background for their perspective on 
life in the systematic doctrines of Stoic theory, and so they retained 
a direct and inner connection with the movement of philosophy 
that acknowledges the demand for universal validity. Indeed, they 
take their place in philosophy as a further development of a theory 
of personality based on pantheistic determinism. This is a move-
ment that recurs in nineteenth- century German philosophy, and 
because of the nature of such a theory of personality it also shows 
a strong tendency towards more free modes of expressions. How-
ever, a series of modern thinkers broke away even more decisively 
from philosophy’s demand for universal validity. The art of life- 
experience and life- conduct during the Renaissance had its fruition 
in the essays of Montaigne. Montaigne leaves behind him the me-
dieval assessment of life and abandons the demand for foundations 
and universal validity even more decisively than Marcus Aurelius. 
Only in occasional and brief remarks does his work go beyond the 
study of human beings: He regards his essays as his philosophy. For 
him philosophy is about cultivating judgment and an ethos; firm-
ness and honesty are the source of genuine or true philosophy. And 
by the way that Montaigne characterizes his work as philosophy, 
he assumes an indispensable role in the history of this sphere of life. 
Similarly, Carlyle, Emerson, Ruskin, Nietzsche, even Tolstoy and 
Maeterlinck, have just as little to do with systematic philosophy 
and they turn away from it more self- consciously and firmly than 
Montaigne and most consistently eliminate every connection with 
philosophy as science.
These phenomena, like mysticism, are not dim mixtures of phi-
losophy with some other sphere of life; rather, they express a devel-
opment of the human psyche. Let us try to grasp the essence of 
this modern philosophy of life. It forms a side of philosophy that 
gradually relaxes the methodological demand for universal validity 
and unconditional grounding, and the procedure by which the in-
terpretation of life is drawn from life- experience gradually assumes 
increasingly freer forms. Aperçus are combined to create an unme-
thodical but impressive interpretation of life. This genre of literary 
activity is related to the ancient art of the sophists and rhetoricians 
that was strictly excluded from the field of philosophy by Plato be-
cause they allowed persuasion to take the place of methodological 
proof. And yet a strong inner bond connects a few of these thinkers 
with the movement of philosophy itself. Their art of persuasion is 
370
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
204 
IV
oddly bound up with a terrible seriousness and a great sense of 
truthfulness. Their eyes remain fixed upon the riddle of life, but 
they are doubtful that this can be solved by means of a univer-
sally valid metaphysics or on the basis of a theory of the world- 
order. Life should be interpreted in terms of itself— that is the great 
thought that connects these philosophers of life with experience of 
the world and with poetry. From Schopenhauer on, such thinking 
has become ever more hostile to systematic philosophy. It is now 
the focus of philosophical interest for the younger generation and 
has produced works that express a literary trend of some magni-
tude and independent character. And as these thinkers claim the 
name of philosophy for themselves, they prepare the way today, the 
way the religious thinkers did at one time, for the future develop-
ment of systematic philosophy. For after the complete destruction 
of the universally valid science of metaphysics, a new method must 
be found that is independent of it in order to determine and make 
decisions about the values, goals, and rules of life. On the basis of a 
descriptive and analytic psychology that proceeds from the overall 
structure of psychic life, we shall have to seek for a solution to this 
problem that contemporary philo sophers of life have set for them-
selves within the bounds of methodological science, even though it 
will be a more modest and less dogmatic solution.
The complex relation between religion, philosophy, life- experience, 
and literature that we meet with at this level demands that we turn 
back to the relations that exist between the forces of culture in the 
individual and in society. Uncertainty about how to delimit philoso-
phy, based upon the changing character of its defining marks, leads 
us to define philosophy as a function that can only be understood 
fully if we go back to the life- nexus that encompasses the individual 
and society to find philosophy’s proper place in them. That requires 
the application of a new way of proceeding.
371
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
TWO
The Essence of Philosophy Understood through Its 
Place in the World of Human Spirit
Thus far we have inductively derived the essential features of phi-
losophy from the instances that bear the name of philosophy and 
the concepts formed of them in the history of philosophy. These led 
us back to a function of philosophy as a uniform state of affairs in 
society through which all philosophizing persons could be linked 
to the inner nexus of the history of philo sophy. Philosophy also 
manifested itself in various intermediate forms in such contexts as 
religion, reflection on life, literature, and poetry. These induc tive 
results from the historical facts will now be con firmed by a cogni-
tive definition of the essence of philosophy by placing them in the 
context in which they fulfill their function. In this way, the concept 
of philosophy is completed by explicating its relation to concepts 
to which it is subordinate as well as to those with which it can be 
coordinated.
1. Locating the Function of Philosophy in the 
Nexus of Psychic Life, Society, and History
1. Philosophy’s Place in the Structure of Psychic Life
We understand historically given facts only through the inwardness 
of psychic life. The science that describes and analyzes this inward-
ness is descriptive psychology. Hence it also grasps from within, as 
it were, philosophy’s function in the life of the mind and determines 
its relationship to the other spiritual activities that are most akin 
to it. In this way it brings to completion the conceptual essence of 
philosophy. For philosophy requires the kind of concept that en-
compasses a complex of defining marks that explicate a real nexus 
based on the reflexive awareness of lived experience as well as the 
re- understanding of others. By contrast, the theoretical natural sci-
ences only register the commonalities given in phenomena to the 
senses.
372
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
206 
IV
All human productivity springs from psychic life and its relations 
to the external world. Since the sciences always seek to find regular-
ities, the study of spiritual creations must proceed from regularities 
of mental life. These are of two kinds. We can observe changes in 
psychic life and establish uniformities about them. Our attitude to-
wards these is like the one we have towards external nature. Science 
ascertains such changes by isolating particular processes from com-
plex lived experiences and inductively deriving regularities from 
them. Thus we come to cognize processes of association, reproduc-
tion, or apperception. Here every change is an instance that is sub-
sumable under uniformities. They constitute an aspect of psychol-
ogy that finds the explanative grounds for human products. In this 
way, the distinctive formative processes through which perceptions 
are transformed into fantasy images act as a partial explanation of 
the origins of myth, saga, legend, and artistic creativity. However, 
the processes of psychic life are also connected by another kind of 
relationship. They are united as parts of the nexus of psychic life 
that I also call “psychic structure.” It is a pattern according to which 
psychic facts of various kind become connected with one another 
by an inner experienceable relation as the life of the mind develops. 
The basic form of this psychic nexus is defined by the fact that 
all psychic life is conditioned by its milieu and in turn responds to 
this milieu purposively. Sensations are called forth and represent the 
manifold nature of external causes. Stimulated by the relation of 
these causes to our own life and how this is expressed in feeling, we 
turn our interest to these impressions: We apperceive, distinguish, 
relate, judge, and make inferences. Under the influence of objective 
apprehension, we then attain on the basis of a manifold of feelings 
ever more accurate assessments of the value of aspects of life and 
of the external causes affecting our own life and the system of our 
drives. Guided by these assessments, we change the organi zation of 
the milieu by means of purposive acts of the will, or we accommo-
date our own life- processes to our needs by purposive acts of will. 
That is the nature of human life. And within this human life- nexus, 
perception, memory, thought- processes, drives, feelings, desires, and 
acts of will are interwoven with one another in the most manifold 
ways. Each lived experience as a moment that fulfills our existence 
is a composite.
The structural psychic nexus has a teleological character. When-
ever pleasure and pain provide the experience of what is valuable to us, 
we respond attentively by selecting and appropriating impressions, 
373
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
207
by striving and acts of will, by prioritizing goals and seeking the 
means for attaining them.
Objective apprehension already manifests a purposiveness: The 
forms of representing what is actual constitute stages in a purposive 
system in which the objective world attains an ever more complete 
and conscious representation. This general attitude through which 
we apprehend what is given and how we experience it generates our 
world- picture, our concepts of the actual world, and the particular 
sciences among which our cognition of it is distributed. This, then, 
is the purposive system of our cognition of what is actual. At every 
stage of this process our drives and feelings play a part. They form 
the core of our psychic structure; from there all the depths of our 
being are stirred. We seek to attain the kind of feeling of life that 
can somehow silence our wishes. Life constantly is engaged in ap-
proaching this goal, but as soon as we seem to have grasped it, the 
goal recedes. Only the progression of experience teaches individuals 
what is of enduring value for them. The main work of life, from this 
perspective is to overcome illusions and to come to recognize what 
is truly of value for us. The nexus of processes by which we test the 
values of life and of things I call “life- experience.” It presupposes 
cognizance of what is, that is, our objective grasp of things. And our 
acts of will, whose immediate purpose is directed at changes outside 
or within ourselves, are at the same time means to finding the value 
of different aspects of life as well as of external things— should our 
interest be directed there. Through familiarity with human beings, 
history, and poetry, the means to life- experience become enlarged, 
and so does its horizon. And in this respect our life can attain a 
certain assurance only if it is elevated to the level of universally valid 
knowledge. Can such knowledge, however, ever answer the question 
of what is unconditionally valuable?
Consciousness of life’s values is the basis for a third and final nexus 
in which we seek to guide and order things, human beings, society, 
and ourselves by means of our own acts of will. This nexus includes 
goals, goods, duties, rules of life, and the whole great effort of our 
prac tical activity in the fields of law, economics, social regulation, and 
the control of nature. Also within this general attitude, consciousness 
proceeds to ever higher forms. The final, highest form sought by us is 
that of action on the basis of universally valid knowledge, and once 
more the question arises to what extent this goal can be achieved.
Goal- oriented beings who are directed to the values of life pos-
ited by their drives will develop themselves while differentiating 
374
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
208 
IV
among their capacities and their reciprocal relations to this goal. 
Their development arises from the structure of psychic life. Each 
moment, each epoch of our life, has an independent value in itself 
insofar as its particular conditions make possible a particular kind 
of satisfaction and fulfillment of our existence. At the same time, 
however, all the stages of life are linked as a developmental history 
by which we aspire with the advance of time to achieve an ever 
richer development of the values of life and an ever more stable and 
higher articulation of the life of the soul. And here too we meet the 
same basic relationship between life and knowledge; in the eleva-
tion of our consciousness and the raising our activity to the level 
of valid, well- founded knowledge lies an essential condition for the 
articulation of our inner life.
This inner nexus shows how the empirically established function 
of philosophy follows inherently from the basic characteristics of 
psychic life. If we imagine an individual who is completely isolated 
and also free from the temporal limitations of finite existence, this 
person will still apprehend what is actual, experience values, and 
actualize goods according to the rules of life. A reflective attitude 
towards his activity must arise in him, and it will reach completion 
only with universally valid knowledge about this activity. And, just 
as objective apprehension, the inwardly felt experience of values, 
and the realization of the goals of life are interconnected in the 
depths of this structure, this individual will seek to grasp this in-
ner nexus in the form of universally valid knowledge. The world- 
cognition, the life- experience, and principles of action that cohere in 
this structure must also somehow be unified in conscious thought, 
and this leads the individual to philosophize. Philosophy is embed-
ded in the structure of human beings. Each of us, no matter what 
our position, is engaged in an approximation to it, and each human 
endeavor tends towards philosophical reflection.
2. The Structure of Society and the Place of 
Religion, Art, and Philosophy in It
The individual human being as an isolated being is a mere abstrac-
tion. Family relations, local communal life, cooperation in the di-
vision of labor <competition and communal work, the manifold 
associations that arise from the common pursuit of purposes>, and 
the power relations of dominance and submission make the indi-
vidual a member of society. Since this society consists of structured 
individuals, the same structural regularities are at work there. The 
375
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
209
subjective and immanent purposiveness of individuals manifests it-
self in history as development. Regularities in the singular psyche 
are transformed into those of social life. The differentiation of the 
capacities of the individual and their higher- level interrelations as-
sume more stable and productive forms in the social division of 
labor. The chain of successive generations allows for unlimited de-
velopment because the products of each kind of work persist as 
the basis for ever new generations to build on. Intellectual activity 
continually spreads to other regions, led by a con sciousness of sol-
idarity and progress. This is how continuity comes about in social 
endeavors, how the intellectual energies expended on it grow, and 
the resulting contributions gain increasing articulation. These ra-
tional moments at work in social life that have been recognized by 
social psychology are subject to conditions that underlie the very 
essence of historical existence. Race, climate, life- circumstances, 
social class, and political development, as well as the personal pe-
culiarities of individuals and groups give to every spiritual product 
its particular character. But despite all this variety, the same purpo-
sive systems, which I designate as cultural systems, are generated 
by the ever- constant structure of life, only with different historical 
modifications.
Philosophy can now be defined as one of these cultural systems 
of human society. For through the coexistence of persons and the 
sequence of the generations, those who assume the function of grap-
pling with the riddle of the world and of life through universally 
valid concepts are united in a purposive system. It is now the task to 
determine the place of this cultural system in the social household.
We cognize what is the case based on how the experiences of suc-
cessive generations are linked together by the uniformity of our 
thinking and the identity of a world that is independent of us. As 
conceptual cognition is constantly expanding, it becomes differen-
tiated into an ever- increasing number of particular sciences; yet it 
remains a unity by virtue of their shared relation to the oneness of 
what is actual and their common requirement to provide univer-
sally valid knowledge. This provides the culture of our generation 
the stable, unifying, progressive, and guiding basis for approaching 
the particular sciences.
Human culture extends from this great [cognitive] system to all 
those of its systems in which volitional actions are integrated and 
differentiated. For even the voluntary acts of individuals can form a 
nexus that endures throughout changing generations. The regulari-
ties within specific spheres of conduct, the selfsameness of the actual 
376
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
210 
IV
world at which they are directed, and the demand for the coordina-
tion of actions in order to realize certain ends, all bring about the 
cultural systems of economic life, law, and technology. All of this con-
duct is filled with life values; joy and the enhancement of our exis-
tence inhere in such activities themselves and are derived from them.
There is, however, beyond this exertion of the will an enjoyment 
of the values of life and the values of things that provides relaxation 
from such exertion. This can be found in the joy of living, sociabil-
ity and festivals, sport and jest. But this is also the atmosphere in 
which art unfolds, whose true nature is to linger in the sphere of free 
play, a sphere in which at the same time the meaning of life becomes 
visible. Romantic thought has often called attention to the relation-
ship between religion, art, and philosophy. It is, after all, the same 
riddle of the world and life that stands before poetry, religion, and 
philosophy. The religious person, the poet, and the philosopher all 
share the same kind of relationship to the socio- historical context 
of their life- sphere: although surrounded by this shared context, 
they stand alone. Their creativity lifts them above the order sur-
rounding them, into a region in which they stand completely alone in 
confronting the forces at work everywhere. They rise above all his-
torical relations to a timeless confronta tion with that which always 
and everywhere produces life. They fear the bonds that anteced-
ents and regulations would impose on their creativity. They despise 
the way communities exploit personality by bestowing honor and 
validity according to their own needs. In this way a fundamental 
difference separates the tightly knit connections of the external or-
ganizations and the purposive systems of knowledge or of external 
action from the cooperation characteristic of the cultural systems 
of religion, poetry, and philosophy. The freest of all are the poets. 
Even the stable relations we have to the actual world dissolve in 
the way they play with moods and configurations. The commonal-
ities that bind religion, poetry, and philosophy and which separate 
them from other spheres of life are based, finally, on the fact that 
the application of the will to achieve limited ends has been elimi-
nated. Here human beings are emancipated from the attachment 
to specific givens in that they reflect on themselves and the overall 
relatedness of things. This involves cognition that does not have 
this or that limited thing as its object and action that is not to be 
carried out at a determinate location in a purposive system. Direct-
ing our attention and intention to what is separate and particular 
would negate our essence as a whole, our consciousness of our own 
value. We could not attain independence from the chain of cause 
377
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
211
and effect and from the limits of place and time if it were not for 
the fact that human beings always have available to them the realm 
of religion, poetry, and philosophy that can liberate them from such 
narrowness. The intuitive insights that guide our life here and now 
must always somehow encompass the rela tedness of what is actual, 
of values and ideals, and finally of purposes and rules. The creative 
aspect of the religious intuition always lies in a conception of the 
overall efficacy of things that directs the individual. Poetry is always 
the presentation of some occurrence, grasped in its significance. As 
far as philosophy is concerned, it is obvious that its conceptual, 
systematic procedure is a function of the objective attitude. Poetry 
remains in the sphere of feeling and intuitive insight because it not 
only excludes every limited, determinate purpose, but the volitional 
attitude itself. By contrast, the formidable seriousness of religion 
and philosophy lies in the fact that they grasp in the structure of 
our souls the inner nexus that proceeds from the apprehension of 
what is actual to the setting of goals and, by fathoming this in its 
depths, they seek to give shape to life. In this way they are brought 
to a responsible consideration of life, which is this totality. In the 
full awareness of their truthfulness they become active forces in the 
shaping of life. Closely related as they are, they must— precisely 
because they have the same intention of shaping life— breed con-
tention to the point of struggle for their existence. Here the pro-
fundity of mind and the universal validity of conceptual thought 
compete with each other.
Religion, art, and philosophy are incorporated in this way into 
the unyielding and fixed purposive systems of the particular sciences 
and the institutional order of social action. Akin to one another 
and yet foreign in their intellectual approaches, they stand in the 
strangest of relation ships. We must now try to make sense of this, 
which leads us back to the human disposition to form a world- view 
and how philosophy strives to ground this as universally valid. This 
will expose us to the other side of philosophy, namely, how from the 
concepts and sciences developed in life, the philosophical function 
of generalization and unification is generated.
2. The Theory of World- Views: Religion and 
Poetry in their Relations to Philosophy
Religion, art, and philosophy have a common basic form that is 
rooted in the structure of psychic life. Each moment of our existence 
refers our own life to the world that surrounds us as an envisioned 
378
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
212 
IV
whole. We feel ourselves and the inherent life value of the particular 
moment; we also feel how the instrumental value of things for us 
relates to the objective world. In the course of reflection, the experi-
ence of life and the development of a world- picture come together. 
The evaluation of life presupposes acquaintance with what is, and 
the actual world acquires different kinds of illumination from our 
inner life. Nothing is more fleeting, fragile, or changeable than the 
mood of human beings over against the overall nexus of things. This 
is documented in those lovely poems that conjoin an image of nature 
with an expression of inner life. Our apprehension of the world and 
evaluation of life are in constant flux like the shadows of clouds 
that move over a landscape. The religious person, the artist, and the 
philosopher are differentiated from run- of- the mill human beings as 
well as from geniuses in other realms by the fact that they retain in 
memory such moments of life and raise their content to conscious-
ness and combine these individual experiences so as to create a gen-
eral experience of life itself. In doing so they fulfill an important 
function, not only for themselves, but also for society.
Everywhere interpretations of reality called world- views arise in 
this way. Just as a sentence has a sense or meaning and brings it to 
expression, these interpretations aim to express the sense and mean-
ing of the world. But these interpretations are quite variable even in 
the same individual! They change under the influence of experiences, 
either gradually or sud denly. The epochs of human life, as Goethe 
saw, run through a typical development of world- views. Time and 
place condition their variety. Life- outlooks, artistic expressions of 
world- understanding, religious dogmas, and philosophical formu-
las cover the earth like a vegetation of countless forms. And like the 
plants on the ground, they seem to struggle for existence and space. 
Only a few, aided by the greatness of personality, gain power over 
the people. Saints seek to imitate the life and death of Christ, a long 
series of artists see human beings with the eyes of Raphael, while 
Kant’s idealism of freedom pulls along Schiller, Fichte, and most 
of the important figures of the following generation. The shifting 
currents of psychic life, the contingency and particularity of the 
content of life’s different moments, the uncertainty and changing 
character of our interpretations, evaluations, and goals, this inner 
misery of naive consciousness, so wrongly extolled by Rousseau or 
Nietzsche, are now overcome. The mere form of religious, artistic, 
or philosophical attitudes provides stability and calm and produces 
a nexus binding the religious genius and the faithful, the master artist 
379
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
213
and his students, a philosophical personality and those who stand 
under his influence.
So now we have clarified what is to be understood by the riddle of 
the world and of life as the common object of religion, philosophy, 
and poetry. The structure of a world- view always holds the experience 
of life and a world- picture in an inner relation from which it is always 
possible to derive an ideal of life. Analysis of the higher formations in 
these three spheres of creation as well as the relation of what is actual 
to values and determinations of will in the structure of psychic life 
lead to this insight. Accordingly, the structure of a world- view con-
sists of a nexus in which constituents of different origin and charac-
ter are united. The basic difference between these constituents goes 
back to the differentiation of psychic life that we have designated as 
its structure. The ap plication of the name “world- view” to a spiritual 
formation that encompasses cognition of the world, ideals, the giving 
of rules, and the determination of a highest end is justified by the fact 
that this never assumes an intention to engage in particular actions, 
and accordingly never includes a determinate practical attitude.
The problem of the relationship between philosophy and reli-
gion and poetry can now be reduced to the question of the relation-
ships between different structures of world- views in these three of 
its forms. For they are closely related only insofar as they each pre-
pare for or contain a world- view. Just as the botanist orders plants 
into classes and investigates the law of their growth, so too whoever 
makes differentiations within philosophy must seek out the types of 
world- views and recognize the lawfulness in their formation. Such 
a comparative point of view elevates the human mind to a position 
above the limited conviction that it has grasped the truth itself in 
one of these world- views. Just as the objectivity of great historians 
restrains them from passing judgment on the ideals of particular 
periods, so too the philosopher must understand through historical 
comparisons that the observing consciousness which limits itself to 
registering objects must be understood historically and compara-
tively. He must then assume a position above all of them. With that 
he exemplifies the historicity of consciousness.
The religious world- view is structurally different from the poetic, 
and both are different from the philosophical. This accords with the 
different configurations of the types of world- views within each of 
these cultural systems. And these basic differences between the phil-
osophical, religious, and poetic world- views produce the possibility 
that a transition of a world- view from the religious or artistic form 
380
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
214 
IV
to the philosophical form will occur and vice versa. The transition to a 
philosophical form occurs chiefly due to the mental tendency to give 
fixity and coherence to its activity, which can ultimately be attained 
only by universally valid thought. In this way the questions arise: 
What is distinctive about the structure of these different forms? Ac-
cording to what laws are the religious or artistic transformed into 
the philosophical? At the limits of this investi gation, we come to 
the general problem, which we have no room to consider here: The 
question of the lawful relationships that determine the variability in 
the structure and the variety of types of world- view. Here too the 
method must be to first consult historical experience and then to 
articulate the psychic lawfulness exhibited in the results.
1. The Religious World- View and Its Relations to 
the Philosophical World- View
The concept of religion resembles that of philosophy. To begin with, 
it refers to something that recurs as an aspect of the life of socially- 
related individuals. And because it places the individuals involved 
in inner relations to one another and binds them together as part of 
a nexus, the concept of religion refers at the same time to a system 
that binds religious individuals as members of a whole. Defining 
the concept of religion is subject to the same difficulty that we saw 
with regard to philosophy. The scope of religious facts would have 
to be estab lished according to the usage of the term and what is 
associated with it so that then the concept of its essence can be 
derived from the broad range of facts that fall under it. This is not 
the place to discuss the methodological procedure that solves these 
difficulties. Here only its results will be used for the purpose of dif-
ferentiating between religious world- views.
A world- view is religious insofar as it has its origin in a par-
ticular type of experience that is rooted in a religious occurrence 
or process. Wherever the name “religion” appears, its characteristic 
feature is communion with the invisible. For this is the case even at 
its most primitive levels as well as in the last stages of its develop-
ment when this communion consists only in the inner relation of 
actions to something that transcends everything empirical. Religion 
can involve such an ideal that makes possible a religious attitude 
or a relation to the divine order of things. By means of this com-
munion, religion develops its forms throughout history to become 
an ever more comprehensive and perfectly differentiated structural 
nexus. Religious experience is the process whereby this takes place 
381
382
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
215
and must contain the productive basis of all religious views and 
the cognitive basis for every religious truth. This is a form of life- 
experience, whose specific character lies in the reflection that ac-
companies communion with the invisible. Life- experience considers 
the progression of our lived experiences to reflect on the values of 
life, the productive values of things, and the resulting highest pur-
poses and rules of action. What is distinctive about religious life- 
experience is that wherever religiosity rises to full consciousness, 
it places the highest and unconditionally valid value of life in the 
communion with the invisible and finds in the invisible object of 
this communion the unconditionally valid and ultimate productive 
value from which all happiness and blessedness flow. Accordingly, 
the invisible becomes the starting point for all determinations of the 
goals and rules of action. This is decisive for the distinctive nature 
of the religious world- view. Its focal point is the religious experi-
ence in which the totality of psychic life is in play. The religious 
experience based on this totality defines every aspect of this world- 
view. All insights concerning the unity of the world, insofar as they 
are considered in isolation, arise from this communion. This unity 
must therefore be grasped as a force that stands in relation to our 
life, viz. as a spiritual force, for only that can make such a commu-
nion possible. The ideal of life, i.e., the inner order of its values, 
must be defined through the religious relationship. From it, finally, 
must derive the highest rule for relations among human beings.
The various ways in which this religious communion can occur 
and the consciousness of religious experience can develop make it 
possible to distinguish the historical stages and forms in which the 
religious world- view takes shape.
In the earliest instances of religiosity still accessible to us we al-
ways find belief and practice joined together. They presuppose one 
another. For no matter how the belief that there are living, pro-
ductive, and will- like forces that surround human life may have 
arisen, we find the further development of this belief, as far as we 
can trace it through ethnology and history, to be determined by the 
way in which religious objects are shaped by the practices directed 
at them. Belief in turn determines religious cult since its practices 
only achieve their goal by cultivating belief. For primitive peoples 
religion is the technique of influencing what cannot be grasped and 
what is inaccessible to mere mechanical change, of assimilating its 
powers, of uniting with it, and of entering into a desired relation-
ship with it. Such religious practices are perfected by select individ-
uals, whether a chieftain or a magician- priest. To carry out these 
383
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
216 
IV
practices a kind of occupational class is developed. Everywhere at 
the beginning of the differentiation of male vocations we see the 
emergence of the uncanny profession of the magician, traditional 
healer, or priest— not particularly respected, yet regarded with a 
sometimes fearful, sometimes expectant, awe. From this there grad-
ually forms an organized social class that carries out all religious ac-
tivities: the technique of magical actions, atonement, and purifica-
tion. This class is the proprietor of knowledge until an independent 
science arises and breaks away from it. This professional class frees 
itself for the divine through asceticism; it must preserve its relation 
to the invisible through renunciations that separate it from all other 
persons in holiness and dignity. This is the first limited way in which 
the religious ideal is prepared for.
From this communion with the invisible, as mediated by special 
persons and directed at attaining goods and averting evils, primitive 
religious ideas are formed at this level of religiosity. These ideas stem 
from the mythic level of representation and its inner lawfulness. 
Part of the original vitality and wholeness of humanity is that in its 
concerns with the external world, it experiences manifestations of 
something living, and this is the universal presupposition for reli-
gious communion. The technique of religious practices necessarily 
reinforced this form of apprehension. As subjective, variable, and 
manifold as these ex periences were, each nomadic horde or tribe 
gave them a uniformity by making the religious experience commu-
nal, which gained these experiences an acceptance based on their 
own logic of analogy. Where no comparison with scientific evidence 
was yet available, it was much easier to establish a shared firmness 
of belief. When dreams, visions, and abnormal nervous conditions 
of all kinds entered into life as miraculous, the logic of religion 
gained experiential material that was especially suited to serve as 
verification of the influence of the invisible. The suggestive power 
of the contents of belief and their mutual justification, following the 
same religious logic as did their initial establishment, is then aug-
mented by a would- be experimental confirmation that derives from 
the efficacy of fetishes in their magical manipulation. And today we 
still see the power of a devotional image being put to the test by 
people who are sick and testified to by pictures and reports from 
pilgrimage shrines; then there are the actions of magicians, oracle 
priests, monks, vehement movements, and extraordinary states ac-
companied by apparitions and revelations, called forth by fasting, 
loud music, and some kind of intoxication— all that strengthens 
the religious form of certainty. But the essential fact is that in the 
384
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
217
earliest stages of culture accessible to us, according to the nature of 
the people at that time and their conditions of life, primitive reli-
gious belief developed everywhere from the same powerful experi-
ences of birth, death, sickness, dream, and madness. In every living, 
animated body there dwells a second ego, the soul (sometimes also 
conceived as a plurality), that leaves it temporarily in life and sep-
arates from it permanently in death, becoming capable of different 
activities in its existence as a shade. All of nature is animated by 
spirit- like creatures that affect human beings and which they can in 
turn strive to influence by magic, sacrifice, cult, and prayer to make 
them positively inclined towards them. The sky, sun, and stars con-
tain divine forces. Finally, we find among peoples of earlier levels of 
development, another set of ideas concerning the origin of human 
life and the world, which we will not elaborate here.
All the above primitive ideas form the foundation for the religious 
world- view. They undergo transformations, they grow together, and 
every advancing stage of culture works towards this development. 
Within this gradual transformation of religiosity lies the decisive 
moment for progress towards a world- view encompassing changing 
forms of communion with the invisible. Beyond the official cult, 
with its temples, sacrifices, and ceremonies, there emerges a freer, 
esoteric relation between the soul and the divine. A more cultivated 
religious stratum enters into a special relationship with the divine, 
secluding itself but also allowing others to join. This new religiosity 
comes to full expression in certain mysteries, a hermetic life, and 
prophecy. The mysterious power of personality is revealed in the 
religious genius who encompasses in his essence comprehension of 
the world, evaluation of life, and the organization of its affairs. Re-
ligious experiences and their resulting notions enter into another 
aggregate state, as it were. The relation of religious persons to those 
that they influence takes on another inner form. Specific effects are 
no longer experienced or sought, rather the whole of the soul enters 
into this inner communion. These great personalities cease to be 
subject to the power of unknown, dark forces, and no longer take 
pleasure in or suffer from a secret consciousness of the misuse and 
corruption of these forces. The hidden danger in this new, purer 
relation is of a different kind— the enhancement of consciousness 
of self that stems from the effects on the believers and acquires 
the character of a special relation to the invisible from communing 
with it. Among the consequences of this new relationship, one of 
the strongest is that it prepares a unified world- view by means of 
an inner relationship in which all moments of religious communion 
385
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
218 
IV
and all aspects of its object relate to each other. Wherever disposi-
tions and circumstances allowed a normal development, a religious 
world- view was formed, no matter how much time it took for this 
change in communion with the invisible to get started at differ-
ent places, what stages were gone through, and whether or not the 
names of the religious personalities have been forgotten.
The structure and meaning content of the religious world- view, 
as it evolves in this way, are determined by religious communion 
and the experience shaped by it. This is why primitive religious 
ideas maintain their strength with an unusual tenacity despite their 
continual transformation. Thus our grasp of the world, the values 
we attribute to things, and our ideal of life acquire a distinctive 
form and coloration in the religious sphere.
In experiences of religious communion human beings find them-
selves defined by a dynamic that is inscrutable and uncontrollable 
within the sensory causal nexus. It is a willful and mental dynamic. 
This is how the basic form of religious thought arises, how it is 
brought to bear through myth, cult ceremonies, worship of sensory 
objects, the symbolism of the liturgy, and allegorical interpreta-
tions of Holy Scriptures. The method of establishing religious in-
sight based upon belief in souls, the worship of stars, and primitive 
communion with the invisible attains here an inner coherence that 
corresponds to the level of world- view formation. The intellect can-
not grasp the assumptions contained in this way of seeing; it can 
only decompose them. Here what is particular and visible means 
more than what meets the eye. This relationship is different from 
the meaning of signs and from what is meant in a judgment, as well 
as from the symbolic in art, yet it is akin to all of them. It contains 
a unique type of representation: In accordance with the relation of 
everything phenomenal or visible to the invisible, the former only 
signifies the latter, yet it is one with it. <This is the relation in which 
the world- picture stands to the divine: It encompasses the efficacy 
of the invisible.> Conse quently, even at this representational level 
of inner communion with the invisible, the efficacy of the latter can 
be bestowed on visible individuals. Even at this general level the 
divine continues to disclose itself in persons and in religious acts. 
Only a small number of peoples and religions have been able to 
permanently overcome the personification of deities associated with 
this stage of religious thought.
From early times divine powers have been brought together in var-
ious ways into one that is supreme. By 600 B.C. this had taken place 
by and large among the most important of the oriental peoples. The 
386
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
219
unity of the names of a god, the supremacy of the victorious stron-
gest god, the uniqueness of the holy, the resolution of all differences 
in a mystical religious object, insight into the harmonious order of 
the stars— this and numerous other different starting points lead to 
the doctrine of a single invisible power. Since in the centuries during 
which this great movement took place among the Eastern peoples, 
there was an active exchange between them, there can be no doubt 
that this was also a contributing factor to the spread of the main 
ideas of those times. But all these views of the unity conditioning 
the world carry the mark of their religious origin in their concern 
with goodness, providential insight, and relevance to human needs. 
In most of them the basic category of religious thought conceives 
the divine to be surrounded by forces found in the visible world, or 
it must appear as a god on earth, struggling with demonic powers, 
disclosing itself in holy places, in miracles, or in the practices of 
a cult. The language in which religious communication about the 
divine is manifested must always be simultaneously sensory and 
spiritual. Symbols such as light, purity, elevation are all expressions 
for the experienced feelings of value adhering to the divine essence. 
The most universal and definitive scheme for really interpreting 
things in terms of a divine coherence is a world that is teleologi-
cally constituted. Behind the nexus of external objects, in it and 
beyond it, there is a spiritual order in which the power of the divine 
is manifested as purposive. At this point the religious world- view 
passes over into the philosophical. For metaphysical thought from 
Anaxagoras to Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus is determined by 
the concept of a teleological world- system.
Through its inward communion with the invisible, naive human 
consciousness of life undergoes a transformation. The more the gaze 
of the religious genius is directed at the invisible and his feelings are 
absorbed in this relationship, the more his yearning consumes all 
worldly values insofar as they do not serve this communion with 
God. This is how the ideal of the saint and the technique of asceti-
cism directed at the elimination of the transitory and sensual desires 
in the individual arise. Conceptual thought is not in a position to 
give expression to this turning away from the sensory to the divine. 
In the symbolic language common to quite different religions, it is 
called a rebirth, its goal being a loving communion between the 
human soul and a divine being.
In the sphere of the will- directed action and life- institutions we 
also see religious communion generate a new moment that contrib-
utes to the consecration of worldly relations. All those who commune 
387
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
220 
IV
with the divine are thereby united into a community that is superior 
to all others to the degree that the value of the religious relation 
outweighs that of all other life- institutions. The inner depth and 
strength of relations in this community have found an appropriate 
expression in religious symbolic language. Those bound together in 
the community are called brothers, and their relationship to God is 
designated as that of children of God.
Using this feature of the religious world- view, we can understand 
its main types and their relations to one another. The evolution of 
the universe; the immanence of reason in the world— both in the 
social order and in the course of nature; an overall spiritual unity 
behind all the divisions to which the soul subjects itself; the dualism 
of the good, pure, divine order and the demonic; an ethical mono-
theism of freedom: All these basic types of the religious world- view 
serve to grasp the divine through value- relations established by re-
ligious interaction between the human and the divine, the sensual 
and the ethical, unity and plurality, secular norms and the religious 
good. Here we can discern the early stages of the philosophical 
world- view into which the religious world- view passes over. Religion 
and mysticism precede philosophy among all peoples that progress 
partly or fully to philosophy.
This change is connected to another, more general one that takes 
place in the religious world- view. Religious imagery recurs in a new 
aggregate state. Religion and the religious world- view gradually— 
for this change is slow— take on the form of conceptual thought, 
but without eliminating the imagistic form. The lower forms of re-
ligious communion continue to exist besides the higher forms. They 
remain in every form of developed religion as its lower strata. The 
magical aspects of religious ritual, the submission to priests pre-
sumed to have magical power, and the crudest sensory belief in the 
efficacy of religious places and images survive in the same religion 
and creed from which a deeply felt mysticism develops based on a 
highly refined inward form of religious communion. In the same 
way the iconography of religious symbolism still retains its force 
alongside theological concept- formation. Although the stages of re-
ligious communion are related to one another as higher and lower, 
such a relation does not hold between the various modifications in 
the form of the religious world- view. For it is part of the nature of 
all religious experiences to assure their objective validity, and this 
goal can only be achieved by conceptual thought. Yet this very con-
ceptual effort serves to show religion’s total inadequacy for such an 
undertaking.
388
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
221
These processes can be studied most thoroughly in Indian and 
Christian religiosity. In Vedanta philosophy and in the philosophy 
of Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas such a transition is ac-
tualized. Yet both cases show the impossibility of overcoming the 
internal limits rooted in the particular nature of religious attitudes. 
This specific attitude of religious persons— which has its source in 
older kinds of dogmatic thinking— gave rise in Vedanta philoso-
phy to the vision of liberation from the chain of birth, effort, ret-
ribution, and migration by means of a knowing in which the soul 
grasps its identity with the unchanging reality of Brahman.1 Thus 
a contradiction arose between a fearful reality— which dogma con-
ceived as the inescapable circle of doer, deed, and suffering— and 
the metaphysical doctrine demanding that all divisions be regarded 
as illusory. Christianity was first developed by means of dogmas 
of an elementary or first order: creation, the fall, God’s revelation, 
Christ’s union with God, salvation, sacrifice, and atonement. These 
religious symbols and their relations to each other belong to a re-
gion wholly different from that of the intellect. But there was also 
an inner need that led to the clarification of the meaning content of 
those dogmas and brought out how things human and divine were 
intuited. It would be an injustice to the history of Christianity to 
regard its adoption of ideas from Greek and Roman philosophy as 
merely an external fate, imposed upon it from without; it was at 
the same time an inner necessity called for by the formative laws 
of religiosity itself. As these original dogmas were integrated into 
cosmological categories, dogmas of a second order arose: The doc-
trine of the attributes of God, the nature of Christ, the process of 
a Christian human life. Here the inward nature of the Christian 
religion suffered a tragic fate. These concepts isolate the particular 
moments of life and oppose them to one another. In this way an in-
soluble conflict arose between God’s infinity and his attributes, be-
tween his different attributes, between the divine and the human in 
Christ, between freedom of the will and predestination, between the 
atonement made by the sacrifice of Christ and our ethical nature. 
Scholasticism wore itself out in vain trying to solve these conflicts; 
rationalism used this failure to attack dogma; mysticism returned 
to a doctrine of primary religious certainty. Even though scholas-
ticism from Albertus Magnus on was led to transform a religious 
world- view into a philosophical one and to liberate it from the alien 
sphere of positive dogmas, it could not in this way overcome the 
1 The supreme God force in all things.
389
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
222 
IV
limits imposed by Christian communion with God. The attributes 
of God that it posits remain incompatible with God’s infinitude, 
and divine determination remains inconsistent with human free-
dom. This same impossibility of changing the religious world- view 
into a philosophical one occurs wherever the attempt is made.
Philosophy arose in Greece, where wholly independent persons 
directly turned their cognitive acquaintance with the world into uni-
versally valid knowledge. It has been re- established more recently by 
researchers who have set themselves the same problem of cognizing 
the world, independently of ecclesiastical orders. Both times philoso-
phy arose in connection with the sciences and based the constitution 
of world- cognition on a stable framework of causal connections, in 
contrast to an evaluative religious conception of the world. In phi-
losophy a change in inner attitude takes place.
This analysis shows the respects in which religious and philo-
sophical world- views have the same form and the respects in which 
they differ. The structure of each is the same in its basic features. 
The same inner relationships regarding the interpretation of reality, 
evaluation, the setting of goals, and regulation exist in both. They 
also show the same inner coherence whereby personality is self- 
organized and stabilized. Similarly, objective apprehension contains 
the power to shape personal life and social organization. These two 
kinds of world- view are so close to each other, so related to one 
another, so in agreement about the sphere that they aim to control, 
that they must collide everywhere. This is because in the end each 
confronts the riddle of the world and life completely differently— as 
different as religious communion and an expansive relation to all 
kinds of reality, as different as a self- assured religious experience, 
steadfast in its purpose, and the life- experience that calmly and 
serenely reflects upon every inner act and attitude. In religion the 
determining factor is an experience of an unconditioned, infinite, 
objective value to which everything finite is subordinated. Thus the 
experience of the infinite value for life of communion with the in-
visible conditions all objective apprehension and the setting of all 
goals. The transcendent consciousness of something spiritual is it-
self only the projection of the greatest religious experience in which 
human beings grasp the independence of their will from the whole 
sphere of nature. The origin of this religious world- view lends its 
hue to everything else; the basic form of seeing and confirmation 
imposed by it governs every religious formation in a mysterious, 
dangerous, and irresistible way. Opposed to this, philosophy offers 
a calm equilibrium of mental attitudes, a recognition of what each 
390
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
223
of these attitudes can bring about, namely, the use of the different 
sciences, and the enjoyment of secular institutions. But it entails a 
never- ending effort to find a universally- valid coherence in all this, 
an ever- growing experience of the bounds of cognition, and of the 
impossibility of objectively connecting what is given in these differ-
ent ways of considering things, and so, finally, resignation.
In this way historical relations arise between these two kinds of 
world- view that can be discerned in their nomenclature, concepts, 
and historical content. Religiosity is subjective and determined by 
particular lived experiences, and has an inscrutable, highly personal 
character that must seem like “foolishness” to anybody who has 
not shared these experiences. The religious attitude remains bound 
by the limits of its origin, in a one- sided, historically, and personally 
conditioned religious experience and the inner form of religious vi-
sion with its direction towards the transcendent. But now that its 
cultural context confronts religion with scientific results, conceptual 
thought, and secular education, it experiences its vulnerability de-
spite all its inner power and recognizes its limitations despite all its 
claims to have a message and a broader significance. The religious 
person who is sensitive enough to feel these limitations and to suffer 
from them must aspire to overcome them. The inner law according 
to which general ideas can only receive final formulation in concep-
tual thought, pushes in the same direction. The religious world- view 
attempts to transform itself into a philosophical world- view.
But the other side of this historical relationship is that the re-
ligious world- view has provided an extensive preparation for the 
philosophical world- view in terms of conceptual explication and 
grounding. At first the attempts to provide a foundation for reli-
gious know ledge were very fruitful for philosophy. No matter what 
the facts are about Augustine’s original contribution regarding the 
propositions that were passed on to Descartes, Augustine was in-
strumental in the rise of the new procedures of epistemology. Prem-
ises of another kind came from mysticism to Nicholas of Cusa and 
then to Bruno. Descartes and Leibniz were also influenced by Alber-
tus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas in respect to their distinctions be-
tween eternal truths and the teleologically conceived factual order 
of things. More and more we are coming to see how greatly Des-
cartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz were still affected by the logical and 
metaphysical concepts of the scholastics. Similarly, the types of re-
ligious world- view stand in a variety of relations to the philosoph-
ical. The realism of good and evil realms upheld by the religion of 
Zarathustra and passed on to Judaism and Christianity entered into 
391
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
224 
IV
the way formative power and matter are distinguished in what is 
actual, thereby lending Platonism its distinctive color. The theory of 
evolution from lower to higher divine beings as found in the Babyl-
onians and Greeks paved the way for the theory of the evolution of 
the world. The Chinese doctrine of a spiritual coherence in natural 
orders and the Indian teaching of the illusions and suffering inher-
ent in the sensory manifold as opposed to the truth and blessedness 
of unity prepared for both of the directions in which objective ide-
alism was to unfold. Finally, the Judaic and Christian doctrine of 
the transcendence of a holy creator prepared the way for that type 
of philosophical world- view that has become most widespread in 
the world of Christians and Muslims. Thus all types of the religious 
world- view have had an influence on philosophical world- views, 
but most of all they provide the foundation for the types known as 
objective idealism and the idealism of freedom. Gnosticism created 
the scheme employed in the most influential pantheistic works— the 
emanation of a multifarious world, its beauty and power as well as 
the suffering produced by finitude and separateness, the return to 
divine unity. The Neo- Platonists, Spinoza, and Schopenhauer devel-
oped all this into a philosophy. And Christianity’s world- view, the 
idealism of freedom, developed theological problems and solutions 
that later influenced Descartes and Kant. So it gradually becomes 
evident why and where religious writers must have a place in the 
historical nexus of philosophy and that some among them could 
also have been called philosophers. Yet we also see how no work 
truly shaped by religiosity may claim to have a place in philosophy, 
where the possibilities of universally valid solutions to philosophi-
cal problems have advanced in accordance with an internal logical 
dialectic.
2. The View of Life of the Poets and Philosophy
Every art turns to single and limited events or situations to make 
visible relations that go far beyond them and thereby lend them 
a more general meaning. The impression of sublimity called forth 
by the sculptural shapes of Michelangelo or the tonal sequences 
of Beethoven stems from the characteristic meaning embodied in 
these works, which presupposes a state of mind that is firm, strong, 
persistent, and coherent enough to be able to subordinate to itself 
anything it comes across. But only one art has the capacity and means 
at its disposal to express more than such a state of mind. All the other 
arts are bound to the presentation of some sensory given, which 
392
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
225
is their strength and their limitation. Poetry alone is able to move 
through all of what is actual as well as the realm of ideas. For in 
language it possesses a means of expression for everything that can 
appear to the human psyche— external objects, inner states, values, 
decisions of the will. Its means of expression through speech already 
contains a grasp of the given through thought. Thus if a world- view 
is expressed anywhere in the arts it will be in poetry or literature.
I will attempt to address the relevant questions here in such a 
way that the differences between the aesthetic and psychological 
standpoints will not need to be considered. All poetic works, from 
the most fleeting folksong to the Oresteia by Aeschylus or Goethe’s 
Faust, agree in this, that they represent an occurrence. An occur-
rence can encompass either what is or what can be experienced, ei-
ther our own experiences or those of others, either something from 
the past or in the present. The representation of an occurrence in lit-
erature is a non- actual semblance of a reality that is re- experienced 
and offered for us to re- experience. The representation has been 
removed from the framework of the actual world and the relations 
of our will and our interests in it. Thus it evokes no actual reaction: 
Processes that would otherwise arouse us to act, no longer disturb 
the disinterested attitude of the observer: There is no restraint on 
the will, and it exerts no pressure. As long as we linger in the re-
gion of art all the pressures of the actual world are removed from 
us. Once a lived experience is raised into this world of illusion, the 
processes evoked in the reader or listener are no longer the same as 
they were in the persons who lived through them. In order to more 
clearly grasp this, we separate the processes of re- experiencing from 
the accompanying effects of observing another life. The sequence 
of apprehending the feelings and trials of Cordelia differs from the 
admiration and the sympathy that arise from this re- experiencing. 
The mere understanding of the plot of King Lear includes processes 
that surpass those taking place in the characters involved. Read-
ers of the literary plot must perform the acts of relating subjects 
and predicates, one sentence to another, outer to inner, motives to 
deeds and their consequences, in order to transform narration into 
the imagery of a process and that into an inner nexus. To be able 
understand the factual content they must subordinate it to the gen-
eral representations and relations contained in the words. The more 
that readers become absorbed in this process, the more their pow-
ers of memory, apperception, and establishing relations go beyond 
what Shakespeare expressed in his narrative but may have wished 
to evoke by what he said. This evocation may have concerned the 
393
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
226 
IV
poet more than what was said. Readers grasp universal features of a 
life-relationship in the plot through which its significance is under-
stood. Similarly, the spectators of a drama complete what they see 
and hear on the stage to form a more inclusive whole. An aspect of 
life is disclosed by the way that human actions are subjected to the 
judgment of fate by the dramatic plot. Spectators respond to what 
happens in the plot as they do to life itself: They interpret, relate the 
particular to its context or regard it as exemplifying a general situ-
ation. And without them needing to notice it, the poet guides them 
and lets them draw from the represented occurrence something that 
surpasses it. Thus it turns out that epic as well as dramatic literature 
represent an occurrence for its reader or audience in a way that its 
significance will be grasped. An occurrence or event is grasped as sig-
nificant to the extent that it reveals to us something about the nature 
of life. Poetry is the organ for understanding life and the poet a seer 
who perceives the sense of life. Here the understanding of the audi-
ence and the creativity of the poet meet. This convergence involves 
a mysterious process of applying heat to the hard, jagged ore of a 
lived experience and recasting it into a form that allows the audience 
to find it significant. Shakespeare reads the biographies of Caesar 
and Brutus in his copy of Plutarch; when he connects them in his vi-
sion of what occurred, the characters of Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, and 
Antony come to illuminate each other. There is a necessity in their 
attitudes to each other, and when we also see these great personali-
ties interact with those who represent the greedy, thoughtless, servile 
masses, it becomes clear what the outcome of the conflict among the 
principals must be. Shakespeare knows about Queen Elizabeth, the 
royal character of Henry the Fifth and other kings of many kinds. 
He recognizes an essential feature of human affairs that gives all the 
facts of Plutarch a coherence and to which the historical process can 
be subsumed as an instance: the triumph of unscrupulous sovereign 
types who aim to master reality over republican ideals that no longer 
find adherents. This life- relationship is grasped, felt, and generalized 
to become the motif of a tragedy. A motif is a life- relationship that is 
probed poetically for its significance. In such a motif there resides an 
inner motive power to adapt characters, events, and actions to each 
other so that each general feature of the nature of things will be seen 
without the poet needing to express it, even if that were possible. For 
in each general trait of life there is a relation to the meaning of life 
as such that is wholly unfathomable.
Here is an answer to the question how far a poet expresses a 
life- outlook or even a world- view. Each lyrical, epic, or dramatic 
394
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
227
poem lifts a singular lived experience to the level of reflection on its 
significance. In this they distinguish themselves from recreational 
verse making. Poetry has all the means to show this significance 
without stating it. And the demand that the meaning of events be 
expressed in the inner form of poetry must be fulfilled in every case. 
As a rule, a poetic work somehow goes on to also give a general ex-
pression to the significance of what occurs. Often some of the most 
beautiful lyric poems and folksongs simply express the feeling of 
the situation, but the most profound effect arises when the feeling 
of a life- moment is expanded in a lawlike manner and culminates 
in the consciousness of its significance. In Dante and Goethe this 
expansion borders on meditative or philosophical poetry. In plots 
of this kind what takes place is suddenly put on hold, and the light 
of thought descends on it, or a conversation illuminates what hap-
pens, as in the wise words of Don Quixote, Wilhelm Meister, and 
Lothario. In the middle of the stormy course of a drama, characters 
reflect on themselves and on what is happening so that the spectator 
can feel a sense of release or liberation. Indeed, many great literary 
works go a step further. They gather ideas about life as they emerge 
from the plot and connect them into a conversation, monologue, 
or chorus that forms a coherent and universal interpretation of life. 
Greek tragedy, Schiller’s Bride of Messina, and Hölderlin’s Death of 
Empedocles are excellent examples of this.
On the other hand, poetry leaves its proper realm when it at-
tempts to make pronouncements about the nature of things that 
are not rooted in lived experience. Then an intermediate form of 
describing nature that falls between poetry and philosophy arises 
whose effect is quite different from proper poetic works. The Gods 
of Greece by Schiller is a truly deep lyrical poem in which ideals 
generate inner experiences that run their course with the lawfulness of 
feeling. By contrast, other famous literary works by Lucretius, Haller, 
and Schiller belong to the intermediate class in that they endow 
what is thought with feeling and dress it up with imagery. This in-
termediate form has justified itself by its great effects, but it is not 
pure poetry.
All authentic poetry is by the nature of its object— an individ-
ual lived experience— bound to what poets learn about themselves, 
others, and everything preserved by the human tradition. The liv-
ing source of poetic knowledge of the significance of human events 
is life- experience. This significance attributed to events has more 
than a cognitive value. For according to the structure of psychic 
life its causal nexus coincides with its teleological character. It has a 
395
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
228 
IV
tendency to generate life- values and is vitally related to productive 
values of all kinds. Hence poets create by drawing on life- experience 
and expand its accumulated content whenever they more clearly 
than ever discern signs that point to something inner. The same ex-
pansion occurs when poets find a new way of perceiving the mix of 
traits in a character or first observe a special relation that derives 
from the interaction of two characters, namely, whenever they can 
make a nuance of life visible. An inner world is formed from such 
elements. Poets trace the history of the passions and the develop-
ment of people of the most diverse kind. They articulate the world 
of human characters according to affinities, differences, and types. 
And all this attains a higher complex form, when they discern com-
prehensive universal traits in individual or socio- historical life. And 
this is not yet the highest point of understanding life. Poetic works 
will be all the more mature, the more the motif that constitutes such 
a life- concern is brought into relation to the overall nexus of life. 
Then it will be seen in its bounds and yet at the same time in the 
highest ideal relations. Every great poet must make such an inner 
breakthrough just as Schiller advanced from the one- sided power 
of Intrigue and Love to Wallenstein and Goethe from the first Faust 
fragment to his later life- work.
This reflection on the meaning of life can only find a full ground-
ing through an acquaintance with things human and divine, and it 
first finds its fruition in an ideal of the conduct of life. Thus it con-
tains a tendency to form a world- view. This inner trait of poets finds 
reinforcement from the life- teachings, philosophy, and sciences of 
their time and place. But whatever poets assimilate from them, the 
lived source of their world- view gives it a distinctive structure. In 
contrast to the religious world- view, it is impartial, comprehensive, 
and insatiable in coming to terms with all that is actual. In objec-
tively apprehending nature and the overall coherence of things, the 
poetic world- view is always oriented by the concern with the signif-
icance of life. This concern gives freedom and vitality to its ideals. 
Philosophers become more scientific the more purely they separate 
our attitudes and analyze what is intuited, whereas poets create 
from the totality of their powers.
When aptitude and circumstances lead a poet to form a world- 
view, it still can only be read off from individual works to a limited 
extent. A poetic world- view asserts itself most effectively, not in 
direct assertions, which are never exhaustive, but through the energy 
with which a manifold content is united and its parts are articulated 
396
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
229
to form a whole. The inner form of each true poetic work, including 
the melody of its verses and the rhythmic flow of feeling, is deter-
mined by the conscious attitudes of poets and their times. The types 
of technique of each literary genre must be conceived as the ex-
pression of individual and historical variations of grasping life. But 
technique as a way of forming a body whose soul is the life- concern 
stemming from some occurrence can only manifest a world- view 
one- sidedly: Its fullness exists only in the poet as such. Therefore, 
the supreme effect of a truly great poet only comes about once one 
is able to discern the continuum within which the life- concerns of 
specific works are presented. When Torquato Tasso and Iphigenia 
followed Goethe’s first stormy works, they had only a moderate ef-
fect on a limited number of persons. But then when the Schlegels 
and their Romantic companions showed the inner linkage of these 
works to a life- attitude and illustrated how their style contributed 
to this, Goethe’s influence was enhanced. This refutes the trite prej-
udice that the efficacy of works of art is harmed by aesthetic, liter-
ary, and historical understanding.
The forms of poetic world- views are infinitely manifold and 
flexible. What poets draw from their own life- experience and what 
their times contribute converge to form external constraints and 
limits on their thought. But the inner tendency to interpret life on 
the basis of our experience of it constantly presses against these lim-
its. Even when poets receive the systematic frame of their thought 
from without, as Dante, Calderon, and Schiller did, the power to 
transform it never ceases. But the more freely they draw from the 
experience of life, the more they are subject to the power of life itself, 
which exposes them to ever new aspects. Thus the history of liter-
ature reveals the infinite possibilities to feel and observe life that 
are contained in human nature and its relations to the world. Both 
the religious relation that forms congregations and creates tradi-
tion, and the character of philosophic thought that manifests itself 
in a continuum of stable concept formation, serve to circumscribe 
world- view to fixed types. Poets are the true human beings in freely 
allowing life to affect them. In ordinary people, reflection on life is 
too weak for them to reach a firm position in the modern anarchy 
of views on life. In poets the effect of the various aspects of life is 
too strong, their sensibility for its nuances too great, for one delimited 
type of world- view to always do justice to how life speaks to them.
 The history of poetry and literature shows an increase in the ef-
forts and power to understand life out of itself. The influence of the 
397
398
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
230 
IV
religious world- view on poets is steadily declining, not only in spe-
cific nations but also for humanity as a whole. The effect of scientific 
thought is ever more on the rise. The rivalry among world- views 
serves to reduce their power to convince the public. The intensity of 
the imagination is constantly being eroded in highly cultivated peo-
ples by the discipline of thought. So it is becoming almost a rule of 
method for poets to interpret the actuality of things without preju-
dice. And every contemporary poetic tendency attempts to solve this 
task in its own way.
These characteristics of the poetic outlook on life and world- view 
produce the historical relation of poetry to philosophy. The struc-
ture of poetic life- outlooks is quite different from the conceptual 
articulation of the philosophical world- view. No regular progres-
sion from the poetic to the philosophical world- view can take place. 
The poetic world- view offers no concepts that can be assimilated 
and elaborated. Nevertheless, poetry affects philosophical thought. 
Poetry prepared for the rise of philosophy in Greece and its renewal 
in the Renaissance. It exerts a regular and enduring influence on 
philosophers. Poetry was first in providing an objective consider-
ation of the world order entirely apart from interests and utility, 
thereby preparing for the philosophical attitude. The effect of Ho-
mer in this regard must have been immeasurable; it was exemplary 
for freely surveying the overall scope of world- life. Homeric intu-
itions about human beings became a resource that psychological 
analysis has never fully exhausted. These intuitions expressed the 
ideal of a higher humanity more freely, serenely, and humanely than 
philosophy ever could. The Homeric life- outlook and world- view 
determined the life- attitude of great philosophers. The new joy in 
life of Renaissance artists turned into the theory of immanent world- 
values in philosophy starting with Bruno. Goethe’s Faust contained 
a new concept of the comprehensive power of human beings to savor 
and intuit the whole of things in productive ways. This work in 
conjunction with the ideal of the transcendental school moved phi-
losophy toward the elevation of human existence. And Schiller’s 
historical dramas provided a strong impetus for the development of 
historical consciousness. The poetic pantheism of Goethe prepared 
for its more complete philosophical form. Conversely, the influence 
of philosophy permeates the poetry of the time. It penetrates the 
innermost poetic concern to shape a life- outlook. Philosophy offers 
literature ready- made concepts and closed types of world- outlook. 
It ensnares poetry in dangerous but indispensable ways. Euripides 
studied the sophists; Dante studied medieval thinkers and Aristotle; 
399
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
231
Racine comes from Port- Royal; Diderot and Lessing draw from 
Enlightenment philosophy; Goethe absorbs himself in Spinoza; Schil-
ler becomes a student of Kant. And even though Shakespeare, 
Cervantes, and Molière were never captives of any philosophy, 
countless subtle influences of philosophical doctrines nevertheless 
penetrate their works as the indispensable means to hold fast to the 
various aspects of life.
3. The Philosophical World- View: The Endeavor 
to Attain a Universally Valid World- View
The tendency to develop a life- outlook and a world- view is shared 
by religion, poetry, and philosophy. These are the historical circum-
stances in which philosophy arose. The endeavor to attain a univer-
sally valid life-  and world- view was operative from the beginning. 
Wherever in various regions of Eastern culture the religious world- 
view was developed in the direction of philosophy, this endeavor 
remained predominant and made all other philosophical activity 
subordinate to it. And when philosophy appeared in Greece in its 
full import, the same tendency to comprehend all of existence in 
a world- view manifested itself in the old Pythagorean School and 
Heraclitus. All further development of philosophy was dominated 
by this same striving for more than two thousand years up to the 
epoch initiated at the end of the seventeenth century by Locke, the 
New Essays of Leibniz, and Berkeley. To be sure, this was a time in 
which they had to compete with crude empiricists, gentlemen phi-
losophers, and individuals doing observational research. But this 
was an opposition that asserted itself from outside the philosophi-
cal endeavor. And the skepticism that stemmed from within philos-
ophy itself, from reflection about the procedures and scope of cog-
nition referred its central concern to the same indestructible need 
of the human spirit. The negativity of the skeptical attitude relative 
to this need demonstrated the unrealistic nature of this attitude. We 
have seen how even in the two centuries that carried forward the 
work of Locke, Leibniz, and Berkeley, an inner relation to the prob-
lem of a universal world- view was maintained. Precisely the greatest 
thinker of these two centuries, Kant, is most strongly determined by 
this relation.
This central role of world- views in philosophy can also be con-
firmed through its relation to the other two historical forces. It ex-
plains why religiosity has lived in ceaseless battles with philosophy 
and why poetry, which has given so much to philosophy and received 
400
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
232 
IV
so much from it, could only assert itself through a constant warfare 
against the claims of sovereignty of abstract life- conceptions. Was 
Hegel perhaps right to assert that religiosity and art are subordinate 
forms of the unfolding of the essence of philosophy? Are they des-
tined to increasingly transmute themselves into the higher mode of 
consciousness of the philosophical world- view? The resolution of 
these questions depends primarily on whether the goal of a scientif-
ically grounded world- view can be actualized.
1. The Structure of the Philosophical World- View
Because the philosophical world- view is developed with the aim of 
universal validity, its structure must be essentially different from 
the religious and poetic world- views. It differs from the religious 
world- view in being universal in scope and universally valid. It 
differs from the poetic in aiming to reform life. The philosophical 
world- view establishes itself on the broadest foundation based on 
empirical consciousness, experience, and the empirical sciences, in 
accordance with formative laws grounded in the objectification of 
lived experiences in conceptual thought. When the power of dis-
cursive thought, whose judgments always relate an assertion to an 
object, is able to penetrate the depths of lived experiences, the entire 
world of feeling and volition comes to be objectified as concepts of 
values and their relations and as rules that express constraints on 
the will. The kinds of objects that correspond to these general atti-
tudes are separated out. Each sphere that is determined by a basic 
attitude forms a systematic nexus. The relations of entailment that 
exist among assertions demand a stable standard of evidence for 
cognizing what is actual. In the region of values this leads thought 
to advance to assumptions about objective values, indeed to the de-
mand for unconditional values. Similarly, in the domain of human 
action thought comes to rest only when it has reached a highest good 
or a supreme principle. The moments that constitute life are laid 
out and differentiated into systems by universalizing concepts and 
generalizing propositions. Logical grounding as the form of system-
atic thought links the conceptual constituents ever more clearly and 
completely. And the highest concepts reached by these systems— 
universal being, ultimate ground, unconditional value, and highest 
good— are comprehended in the concept of a teleological world- 
order in which philosophy converges with religiosity and artistic 
thought. The basic features of the teleological schema were estab-
lished in accordance with inner formative laws. The durability of 
401
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
233
this schema was also considered to be rooted in the nature of things 
through the end of the Middle Ages and its natural power still per-
sists today. On this basis or in opposition to it, the main forms of 
philosophical world- view have differentiated themselves.
When a world- view is grasped conceptually, grounded, and thus 
raised to universal validity, we call it metaphysics. It is then artic-
ulated into manifold configurations. Individuality, circumstances, 
nationality, and period evoke a countless number of nuances in 
world- perspective not only in poets, but also in philosophers. This 
is because the possible ways in which the structure of our psychic 
life can be affected by the world are infinite. Likewise, the means of 
thought change constantly in accordance with scientific standards. 
But the continuity that connects thought processes and the con-
sciousness that characterizes philosophy have as a consequence that 
an inner nexus links certain groups of systems. Some thinkers feel 
an affinity, which produces the consciousness of opposition to other 
groups. Thus classical philosophy brought out the opposition be-
tween the teleological metaphysics that was its natural system, as it 
were, and the world- view that limits the apprehension of what is ac-
tual to relations between causes and effects. And when the meaning 
of the problem of freedom came to the fore starting with the Stoics, 
the systems of objective idealism according to which the ground of 
things determines the world- nexus began to differentiate themselves 
ever more clearly from the idealism of freedom in which the lived 
experience of the free will is upheld and projected into the world- 
ground itself. Thus the basic types of metaphysics were articulated 
on the basis of the decisive differences of human world- views. There 
are a great many such world- views and systematic forms.
2. Types of Philosophical World- View
The historical induction whereby these types must be established 
cannot be elaborated here. The empirical marks from which this 
kind of induction proceeds derive from the inner affinity among 
metaphysical systems, from the transformative process whereby one 
system conditions another, and from the consciousness that think-
ers have of their agreements and differences. But above all we derive 
these marks from the inner historical continuum in which such a 
type is ever more clearly articulated and grounded, and from the 
productive influence that proceeds from such typical systems as can 
be found in Spinoza, Leibniz or Hegel, in Kant or Fichte, in d’Alem-
bert, Hobbes or Comte. Between these types there are also forms in 
402
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
234 
IV
which these world- views are not yet fully differentiated. Other forms, 
defying logical consistency, aim to hold on to the whole complex of 
metaphysical motifs; they always prove to be unfruitful for the fur-
ther development of world- views and unproductive in life and liter-
ature, however strong they may be due to their complicated ground 
plan or technical advantages. From the rich manifold of such nu-
ances of world- views the consistent, pure, and most productive types 
stand out as important. From Democritus, Lucretius, and Epicurus 
to Hobbes, and from him to the Encyclopedists to modern materi-
alism as well as Comte and Avenarius, we can discern a link despite 
great differences in their systems. This group of systems displays a 
unified type whose initial form can be designated as materialistic or 
naturalistic and whose further development under the conditions of 
critical consciousness leads to Comtean positivism. Heraclitus, strict 
Stoicism, Spinoza, Leibniz, Shaftesbury, Goethe, Schelling, Schlei-
ermacher, and Hegel mark the stages of objective idealism. Plato, 
the Hellenistic- Roman philosophy of the life concepts that Cicero 
represents, Christian speculation, Kant, Fichte, Maine de Biran and 
other French thinkers like him, and Carlyle form the developmental 
stages of the idealism of freedom. This differentiation of metaphys-
ics into these [three types of] systematic order derives from the inner 
lawfulness that has been shown to be operative in the formation 
of metaphysical systems. And this development and the modifica-
tions it brings with it are mainly affected by the process whereby our 
relation to the actual world passes through determinate positions. 
Thus earlier we saw positivism as the most prominent instance of 
a non- metaphysical method that seeks a stable ground for cognition 
while now our overall assessment is to see it as an epistemologically 
grounded transformation of a [metaphysical] world- view. Beyond 
that, the development and the more finely nuanced discernment of 
types is conditioned by the process whereby the ideal concepts of 
humanity have unfolded on the basis of relations among values, pur-
poses, and constraints on the will.
The cognition of what is actual is rooted in the study of nature, 
for this alone can extract a lawful order from the facts. The con-
cept of causality is dominant in the context of this kind of world- 
cognition. When it determines experience unilaterally, no room is left 
over for the concepts of value and purpose. Since in the perception 
of what is actual the physical world is predominant in scope and 
force, life- units of a spiritual nature appear as mere interpolations 
in the text of the physical world. Furthermore, only the physical 
403
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
235
world can be cognized with the aid of mathematics and experi-
mentation to reach its intellectual goal. Accordingly, this way of 
explaining the world adopts the form of interpreting what is spiri-
tual on the basis of what is physical. And when on the basis of the 
critical standpoint the phenomenal character of the physical world 
is recognized, then naturalism and materialism are converted into a 
positivism determined by the natural sciences.
A world- view can also be determined by the attitude of the life 
of feeling. It is governed by the perspective of the value of things, 
life- values, the meaning and sense of the world. Then the whole of 
the actual world becomes the expression of something inner and is 
regarded as the unfolding of an unconsciously or consciously ac-
tive psychic nexus. This standpoint discerns an immanent divine 
force in what appear to be many, partial, and restricted individual 
agents. It is a force that determines phenomena in accordance with 
the teleological causality that we find in consciousness. This is how 
objective idealism, panentheism, and pantheism arise.
When the volitional attitude determines our conception of the 
world, then the schema of spirit’s independence of nature or its 
transcendence results. The projection of this onto the universe leads 
to the concepts of divine personality, creation, and the sovereignty 
of personality over against the course of nature.
Each of these world- views finds a way of connecting world- 
cognition, the evaluation of life, and principles of action in the sphere 
of objective apprehension. Its power lies in being able to give an in-
ner unity to the various functions of personality. And each of them 
derives its appeal and the possibility of consistent development 
from its capacity to lawfully derive our multifaceted life from one 
of our attitudes.
3. The Insolubility of the Task: The Decline  
of the Power of Metaphysics
Metaphysics has generated an immeasurable wealth of life- forms. It 
proceeds restlessly from possibility to possibility. Because no form 
satisfies metaphysics, each one is transformed into another. A hid-
den inner contradiction that inheres in the very essence of meta-
physics manifests itself anew in each of its creations and forces it to 
shed its given form and seek another. Metaphysics is characterized 
by a peculiar duality. It strives to solve the riddle of the world and 
life, but its form is universal validity. One face is turned to religion 
404
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
236 
IV
and poetry, the other to the particular sciences. But metaphysics it-
self is neither a science like the other particular sciences nor is it art 
or religion. The presupposition that gives rise to it is that there is a 
point from which the secret of life is accessible to rigorous thought. 
If there is such a point, as Aristotle, Spinoza, Hegel, and Schopen-
hauer assumed, then philosophy is more than any religion and any 
art and also more than all the particular sciences. Where shall we 
find this point at which conceptual cognition and its concern with 
the world- riddle, come together to disclose in this singular world- 
order not only particular regularities about the course of things, but 
also the essence of things? The answer must lie beyond the domain 
of the particular sciences and beyond their methods. Metaphysics 
must raise itself above the reflections of the intellect in order to find 
its own object and its own method. We have surveyed the attempts 
at this in the sphere of metaphysics and demonstrated their inade-
quacy. All the reasons that have been elaborated ever since Voltaire, 
Hume, and Kant to explain the constant change of metaphysical 
systems and their inability to satisfy the demands of science need 
not be repeated here. I will only focus on those reasons that are rel-
evant to the way metaphysics and world- views are related.
 The cognition of what is actual according to causal relations, 
the lived experience of value, meaning and sense, and the volitional 
attitude that encompasses a goal of an act of will and the rule that 
binds it— all these are different attitudes that are connected in our 
psychic structure. Their psychic relation is there for us in lived ex-
perience; it belongs to the ultimate accessible facts of consciousness. 
The subject responds to objects in these distinct ways; it is impossi-
ble to regress behind this fact and find a common ground for this. 
Thus the categories of being, cause, value, and purpose that have 
their source in these attitudes cannot be derived from one another 
or from a higher principle. We can apprehend the world only by one 
of the basic categories. It is, so to speak, only possible to perceive 
the world through one aspect of our relation to it— never the over-
all relation as it would be determined by the systematic unity of 
these categories. This is the primary reason for the impossibility 
of metaphysics: To prevail it would have to argue fallaciously for 
an inner unity of these categories or distort the content of our liv-
ing attitude. A further bound of conceptual thought manifests itself 
within each of these attitudes. First, our thinking cannot combine 
the causal nexus of conditioned processes with an unconditioned 
ultimate cause: The very idea of a manifold whose elements are 
uniformly related is already a riddle, and from an unchangeable 
405
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
237
oneness neither change nor multiplicity can be comprehended. Sec-
ond, we can never overcome the subjective and relative character of 
evaluations that have their origin in feeling: An unconditional value 
is a postulate rather than a concept that can be fulfilled. Third, we 
cannot demonstrate a highest or unconditional purpose, for it pre-
supposes the establishment of an unconditional value. Moreover, 
the rule of action that follows with universal validity from the mu-
tual obligation of wills does not suffice to derive the purposes of 
individuals or of society.
Although no metaphysics is able to satisfy the demands of scien-
tific demonstration, the relation of the subject to the world never-
theless remains a reliable starting point for philosophy on the basis 
of which each of its general attitudes can express one aspect of the 
world. Philosophy cannot grasp the essence of the world through a 
metaphysical system, but it can, like a serious poetic work, disclose 
a trait of life as it has never been seen before and reveal to us the 
various aspects of life in ever new works. Just as an overall perspec-
tive cannot be found in any given artwork, but only approximated 
by all of them, so we confront a world in the typical world- views of 
philosophy as it appears when a powerful philosophical personality 
makes one of the general attitudes dominant over the others and 
its categories over theirs. What can be distilled from the enormous 
work expended by metaphysicians is the historical consciousness 
that they have repeatedly experienced the unfathomable profun-
dity of the world. The last word of the spirit that permeates all these 
metaphysical efforts is not the relativity of each world- view, but 
the sovereignty of the human spirit over against each single one of 
them and at the same time the positive consciousness that in our 
various spiritual attitudes one and the same reality of the world is 
there for us.
It is the task of a theory of world- views to analyze the historical 
development of religiosity, poetry, and metaphysics and to method-
ically explicate the relation of the human spirit to the riddle of the 
world and life while resisting relativism.
4. Philosophy and Science
The conceptual efforts to ground metaphysics constantly engender 
reflection about the nature of thought, its forms, and its laws. The 
conditions that govern our cognition are investigated. These include 
the assumption that there is an actual world that is independent of 
us but accessible to our thinking, the belief that other persons exist 
406
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
238 
IV
and can be understood by us, and finally, the presupposition that 
the course of our inner states in time are real and that lived experi-
ences as they present themselves in inner experience can be validly 
represented in thought. Reflection about the processes that produce 
a world- view and about the grounds that justify its presuppositions, 
accompanies the formation of world- views and grows steadily in 
the conflict of metaphysical systems.
At the same time, the innermost nature of philosophical world- 
views brings out their relation to human culture and its purposive 
systems. We have analyzed culture according to the inner relatedness 
of world- cognition, life and affective experiences, and the practical 
arrangements in which the ideals of our actions are realized. All this 
manifests the psychic structural nexus, which also determines the 
philosophical world- view as it affects all aspects of culture. Because 
the philosophical world- view aims at universal validity and looks 
for justification and coherence everywhere, it must assert itself in 
all spheres of culture and bring to consciousness what occurs there, 
search for grounds, judge critically, and make connections. But in 
doing so it comes up against the reflection that emerges from the 
purposive systems of culture themselves.
1. The Functions of Philosophy That Arise from the Conceptual 
Techniques of Cultural Life
Reflection by human beings about their conduct and the search for 
universal knowledge did not emerge solely from world- views. Before 
philosophers came on the scene, we find the separation of the func-
tions of the state and classifications of constitutions that result from 
political activity. Similarly, the praxis of law and legal procedures 
produced the basic concepts of civil and criminal law; religions for-
mulated dogmas that are distinct from each other yet interrelated; 
artistic practices differentiated themselves. And every progression 
of human purposive systems to more complex forms occurs under 
the guidance of conceptual thought.
Accordingly, functions of philosophy arise that serve to advance 
the thinking that stems from the specific domains of culture. Just as 
no fixed boundary separates the religious world- view from the phil-
osophical, so technical thought gradually goes over into philosoph-
ical thought. Everywhere the spirit of philosophy is characterized 
by universal self- reflection and the person- shaping and reformative 
power rooted in it and simultaneously by the strong tendency of 
philosophical minds to seek the grounds and coherence of things. 
407
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
239
These functions of philosophy are not inherently bound up with the 
formation of a world- view, and they exist even when metaphysics is 
not sought or not recognized.
2. The Universal Theory of Knowledge and the Theory  
of the Specific Cultural Domains
The characterization of philosophy as the self- reflection of spirit 
provides the basis for its always coexisting other aspect, which is 
the striving for a universally valid world- view. In a world- view, the 
experience that is grounded in general attitudes is held together in 
an objective unity. However, when these general attitudes them-
selves and their content- relatedness are raised to consciousness and 
the experiences they produce are investigated and their justification 
is tested, then the other side of self- reflection comes to the fore. 
From this perspective, philosophy proves to be the foundational sci-
ence that has as its object, the form, rule, and connectedness of all 
thought processes that are guided by the aim of producing valid 
knowledge. As logic it investigates the standards of evidence that 
pertain to all correctly completed operations and this in every do-
main in which thought processes are involved. As epistemology it 
goes back from the consciousness of the reality of lived experience 
and the objective givenness of outer perception to the justifica-
tions of these presuppositions of our cognition. As such a theory of 
knowledge, philosophy becomes a science.
Based on this its most important function, philosophy comes to 
stand in relation to the various spheres of culture and assumes spe-
cial tasks in each of them.
In the sphere concerned with representing and cognizing the 
world, philosophy relates itself to the particular sciences that pro-
duce the individual parts of world- cognition. This function comes 
closest to logic and epistemology as the foundational work of philos-
ophy. It elucidates the methods of the particular sciences by means 
of general logic. It uses logic to systematize the methodical concepts 
developed in the sciences. It investigates the presuppositions, the 
goals, and the bounds of the cognition of the particular sciences. 
Then it applies the results thus attained to the problem of the in-
ner structure and the connectedness within the two great scientific 
groups: the natural and the human sciences. None of philosophy’s 
relations to a system of culture is as clear and distinct as this one to 
the sciences, and none has been developed with as much systematic 
consequence. Thus among the one- sided conceptual definitions of 
408
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
240 
IV
philosophy, none has been as illuminating as the one that claims 
that it is the theory of theories, the grounding and comprehension 
of the particular sciences that cognize what is actual.
Less transparent is the relation of philosophy to life- experience. 
Life is the inner relation of psychic functions as framed by the per-
son. Life- experience is the accumulated reflection and meditation 
about life. It serves to raise what is relative, subjective, contingent, 
and scattered in the elementary forms of purposive action to the 
level of insight into what is worthwhile and purposive. What do the 
passions mean in the overall economy of our life? In a life that is 
understood to be natural, what value do sacrifice, fame, and exter-
nal recognition have? The solution to such questions is sought not 
only by the life- experience of individuals; it can also be extended 
to the life- experience acquired by society. Society is the compre-
hensive regulator of the life of human feelings and drives. Through 
custom and law, it establishes bounds on the unruly passions for 
the sake of communal life. Through the division of labor, marriage, 
and property, society creates the conditions for the orderly satisfac-
tion of the drives, thus freeing us from their dreadful tyranny. Life 
gains space for the higher, spiritual feelings and aspirations, so that 
these can attain predominance. The life- experience that society ac-
cumulates through such work produces ever more appropriate de-
terminations of life- values and gives them a stable orderly standing 
through public opinion. Hereby society generates a value hierarchy 
out of itself that then influences individuals. On this social basis, 
the life- experiences of individuals are brought to bear. They arise in 
manifold ways. Personal lived experiences form their matrix insofar 
as values come into play. Other lessons are learned as we observe 
how the passions of human beings can lead to their self- destruction 
and as we trace how they inevitably affect others: all the suffering 
that results. And we complete these life- experiences through history, 
which shows human destiny in bold strokes, as well as through liter-
ature. The latter especially discloses the painful but sweet tensions 
of the passions, the illusions involved, and their dissolution. All this 
works together to make a human being more free and open for res-
ignation and the joy of submitting to the great objectivities of life.
This life- experience is initially unmethodical. But once both the 
import and bounds of its procedure are recognized, it must raise 
itself to the level of methodical reflection that aspires to overcome 
the subjective nature of evaluation. Thus it transitions into phi-
losophy. All the stages on this road are marked by writings on 
life- values, character, temperament, and the conduct of life. And 
409
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
241
as poetry is an important factor in the development of the theory 
of temperaments, characters, and life- conduct, what it reads into 
the souls of human beings to arrive at its distinctive appraisal of 
the values of things, prepares for an insatiable will to understand 
and a more self- conscious grasp of the meaning of life. Homer is 
the teacher of reflective authors, and Euripides is their student. The 
distinctive religiosity acquired by each of us is developed from the 
same background. Experiences about life and frightfully penetrat-
ing insights into the illusion that attaches to all this- worldly goods 
produce a devotion to a transcendent world in every religious ge-
nius. The religious experience would be empty and vacuous without 
the background of the lived misery, meanness, or at least the petti-
ness of human affairs, the separations and the sufferings involved, 
that causes the elevation to holiness as an escape from this cor-
ruptible sphere. This path into solitude was chosen by Buddha, Lao 
Tse, and, as some passages in the gospels reveal, by Christ; Augustine 
and Pascal also travelled this path. And together with the sciences 
and the social institutions of history, life- experiences form the real 
foundation of philosophy. The personal contribution of the greatest 
philosophers is rooted in such life- experiences, which makes their 
clarification and grounding an essential, indeed the most productive 
part of philosophical systems. This is especially evident in Plato, the 
Stoics, Spinoza, and to a lesser extent also in Kant for anyone who 
relates his Anthropology to his early writings. Thus both a system 
of immanent life- values and a system of objective instrumental val-
ues are generated in philosophy; the former system pertains to a 
state of mind, the latter to something external that has the capacity 
to produce life- values.
Finally, philosophy as part of the context of cultural history 
attains a relation to the practical world, its ideals, and its social 
institutions. This is because philosophy involves reflection on the 
will, its rules, purposes, and goods. It finds expression in ethical 
practices and in the social institutions of economics, law, and the 
state, as well in how nature is controlled. The essential nature of 
the volitional attitude can only be elucidated in relation to these 
contexts. What pervades them all is the setting of goals, obliga-
tions, and rules. The most profound philosophical problem in this 
domain is whether all ethical rules are derivable from purposes. 
The insight that Kant arrived at in his categorical imperative can 
be refined into the realization that there is only one unconditional 
absolute in the ethical world, namely, that the mutual obligation 
of wills, whether based on an explicit contract or on an implicit 
410
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
242 
IV
assumption of a long- standing reciprocity, possesses an uncondi-
tional validity for every consciousness. Therefore, lawfulness, the 
commitment to what is right, loyalty, and truthfulness form the sta-
ble framework of the moral world. All purposes and all rules of life, 
even the highest goods and the striving for perfection, are incorpo-
rated in this framework. They establish a hierarchy of oughts that 
proceeds from the obligatory to the moral expectation of good-
ness and devotion to others and from there to personal perfection. 
When philosophical analysis of moral consciousness establishes the 
legitimacy of ethical ideals and separates the obligatory aspect of 
duty from the shifting nature of purposes, then it determines the 
conditions under which the purposive systems of society develop. 
Philosophy also helps us to understand the actual social institutions 
as described and analyzed by the human sciences on the basis of the 
structures of the individual and of society. And when philosophy 
appeals to the teleological character of these structures to derive the 
development and formative laws of these social institutions, while 
subordinating all these necessities to the that highest law of obliga-
tion, it becomes an inner force that works toward the improvement 
of human beings and the advance of their social institutions. At the 
same time, it provides stable standards for them in ethical rules and 
the realities of life.
Let us look back once more at the philosophical world- view. Now 
for the first time we can survey the overall scope of what it is based 
on. The import of life- experience for the development of a world- 
perspective becomes apparent. And finally, we see how the great 
[cultural] spheres that are conditioned by the different mental at-
titudes2 contain problems of independent importance that can be 
treated wholly apart from their place in a world- view.
Thus the relations of philosophy to the various spheres of human 
life give it the right not only to ground and connect what is known 
about them and the particular sciences in which this knowledge has 
been consolidated, but also to treat these same domains in special 
philosophical disciplines such as philosophy of law, philosophy of 
religion, and philosophy of art. There is no disputing that each of 
these theories must be created from the historical and social states 
of affairs that make up the domains of art or religion, of law or 
government, and insofar the work of philosophy overlaps with that 
of the particular sciences. It is also clear that any such philosophical 
theory, which instead of creatively drawing from the material itself, 
2 Presumably cognition, feeling, and willing.
411
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
243
merely relies on the results of the particular sciences and checks 
them here and there, has no right to exist. But given the limitedness of 
human power, the special investigator will only seldom master logic, 
epistemology, and psychology so fully as to preclude a philosoph-
ical theory from adding something new. To be sure, such distinct 
philosophical theories are justified only as provisional responses to 
the insufficiencies of the present situation. On the other hand, the 
task of investigating the inner relations of the sciences to each other, 
on which the logical constitution of each depends, will always re-
main an important part of the function of philosophy.
3.Extending the Spirit of Philosophy to the Sciences  
and Literature
The influence of metaphysics is constantly declining, but philosophy 
is steadily becoming more important in its function of grounding 
and connecting the thinking that has arisen in the special cultural 
domains. The significance of the positivistic philosophy of d’Alem-
bert, Comte, Mill, and Mach derives from its close preoccupation 
with the particular sciences and its efforts to advance its methods 
and to everywhere apply its standard of universally valid knowl-
edge. And in another domain the philosophical thought of Carlyle 
or Nietzsche is positive insofar as it strives to generalize and ground 
a general attitude implicit in life- experience and explicated by poets 
and writers. It is only natural that in this informal way philoso-
phy is able to increasingly influence the overall spiritual life of mo-
dernity. The methodical and generalizing spirit that served to con-
nect the sciences and defined the way Galileo, Kepler, and Newton 
studied nature was then extended on the basis of the positivism of 
d’Alembert and Lagrange3 to the natural sciences in France. And 
on the basis of the philosophy of nature and Kantian critical philos-
ophy, it influenced Ernst von Baer,4 Robert Mayer,5 Helmholtz, and 
Hertz.6 And this generalizing philosophical spirit has asserted itself 
3 Joseph- Louise Lagrange (1736−1813), his 1788 treatise on analytical mechan-
ics offered the most comprehensive treatment of classical mechanics since Newton.
4 Karl Ernst von Baer (1792−1876), a Baltic German biologist, geologist, and a 
founding father of embryology.
5 Julius Robert von Mayer (1814−1878), one of the founders of thermodynamics.
6 Heinrich Hertz (1857– 1894), German physicist who showed that Scottish 
physicist James Clerk Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism was correct and that 
light and heat are electromagnetic radiations.
412
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
244 
IV
especially since the great socialistic theorists offered their perspec-
tive on the sciences of society and history. So it is characteristic for 
the present situation of philosophy that its strongest effects proceed 
not from its systems, but from this free philosophical thinking that 
permeates the sciences and all literature. Even in literature, authors 
such as Tolstoy and Maeterlinck exert an important philosophical 
influence. Dramas, novels, and lyrical poetry have become carriers 
of strong philosophical impulses.
 The spirit of philosophy can be found wherever a thinker has 
moved beyond the systematic form of philosophy to examine what 
is peculiar or obscure in human life such as instinct, authority, or 
faith. It exists wherever researchers use methodological conscious-
ness to lead their scientific discipline back to its ultimate justifica-
tory grounds or forward to generalizations that connect it to several 
other sciences and ground them. This spirit is also present wher-
ever life- values and ideals are subjected to reexamination. What-
ever manifests itself as disorderly or conflicted in a particular time 
period or troubles the heart of a human being is to be reconciled 
through thought; what is obscure is to be clarified; and what is im-
mediately given, standing side by side, is to be mediated and placed 
in context. The philosophical spirit is not content to accept any feel-
ing of value and isolated striving in its immediacy, nor any precept 
or knowledge claim by itself: It demands the justification for every 
claim to validity. In this sense, the eighteenth century rightly desig-
nated itself as the philosophical century due to its thoroughgoing 
efforts to give reason control over what is obscure, instinctive, and 
unconsciously creative in us, and to derive every historical product 
from its sources and its justification.
5. The Concept of the Essence of Philosophy: 
Perspective on Its History and Systematicity
Philosophy has proved to be a complex of very different functions 
that have become integrated through insight into their lawful con-
nection to the essence of philosophy. Such a function always refers 
to a teleological nexus and designates a complex of related capaci-
ties that are fulfilled within this holistic nexus. The concept of a te-
leological nexus of philosophy is not derived from an analogy with 
organic life, nor does it betoken a disposition or an original capac-
ity. The functions of philosophy refer to the teleological structures 
of the philosophizing subject and of society. They involve capaci-
ties by which persons turn within themselves and simultaneously 
413
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
245
produce outward effects. In this they resemble persons concerned 
with religiosity and poetry. Thus philosophy is a capacity that is 
rooted in the spiritual need of individuals to reflect on what they 
do, to achieve an inner balance and firmness in action, and to attain 
a stable relation to the whole of society. At the same time, philos-
ophy is a function that is rooted in the structure of society and 
necessary for the completeness of its life. Accordingly, philosophy is 
a function that uniformly takes place in many minds and connects 
them as part of a social and historical continuum that counts as a 
cultural system. For the marks of a cultural system are uniformity 
in the activities of the individuals that belong to it and a solidarity 
among those affected. When this solidarity takes on fixed forms, 
cultural systems produce organizations. Among all the purposive 
systems, art and philosophy are least able to link individuals. This 
is because the functions performed by an artist or a philosopher 
are not conditioned by any institutional form of life. Their region 
is that of the highest freedom of spirit. And when philosophers be-
come members of such organizations as universities and academies 
to increase their contribution to society, it is vital that their freedom 
of thought be preserved. This freedom may never be infringed, for 
not only does the philosophical character depend on it, but also the 
trust in its unconditional truthfulness and therefore its efficacy.
The most general property that belongs to all philosophical func-
tions is rooted in the nature of objective apprehension and concep-
tual thought. In this regard, philosophy seems to be merely the most 
consistent, powerful, and comprehensive mode of thinking: There 
is no hard and fast line between it and empirical consciousness. 
It follows from the form of conceptual thought that the power of 
judgment should advance to the highest generalizations, and that 
the formation and classifications of concepts advance to an archi-
tectonic highest peak; similarly, what is related by thought must 
be referred to an all- inclusive context and what is grounded to an 
ultimate principle. As it proceeds, thought refers to the common 
objects of all the acts of thinking of different persons, and to the 
continuum of sense perception within which the multiplicity of 
things in space and the manifoldness of their changes and move-
ments are ordered, namely, the world. All feelings and volitional 
acts are related to this world through the spatial location of the 
bodies to which they belong and the perceptual constituents with 
which they are interwoven. All the values, purposes, and goods pos-
ited in these feelings and volitional acts are incorporated into it so 
as to encompass human life. And when thought seeks to express 
414
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
246 
IV
and unite the overall content of perception, lived experience, values, 
and purposes as lived and then given in empirical consciousness, 
experience, and the experiential sciences, it moves from the concat-
enation of things and their changes in the world to a world- concept. 
Such a world- concept goes back to a grounding world- principle, 
a world- cause. It also attempts to determine the value, sense, and 
meaning of the world and asks for a world- purpose. And whenever 
the procedures of generalization, overall integration, and grounding 
are characterized by the aim of knowing, which is to be emanci-
pated from particular needs and restricted interests, they become 
philosophical. And wherever subjects who refer their activities to 
the world at large reflect on them in the same way, we can call 
this reflection philosophical. Accordingly, the basic feature of all 
philosophical functions is the spiritual trait of transcending the at-
tachment to determinate, finite, and restricted interests and thereby 
striving to incorporate theories that were developed on the basis 
of a restricted need into a more inclusive and conclusive idea. This 
trait of thought derives from its own lawfulness and corresponds 
to the broader needs of human nature that barely admit of reliable 
analysis: the joy of attaining knowledge, the need for an ultimate 
firmness in one’s stance to the world, and the striving to overcome 
the attachment of one’s life to restricted conditions. Every psychic 
attitude strives for a stable point that is removed from relativity.
This universal function of philosophy manifests itself under the 
various conditions of historical life in all the philosophical activities 
that we have surveyed. Special functions of great import arise from 
these manifold conditions of life: the refinement of a world- view 
to give it universal validity; the reflection of knowing on itself; re-
lating the theories that are formed in particular purposive systems 
to the system of all knowledge; a critique that probes all of culture 
in order to comprehend it universally and ground it. They all turn 
out to be particular contributions that are grounded in the unitary 
essence of philosophy. For philosophy adapts itself to every situa-
tion in the development of culture and to all conditions of its his-
torical circumstances. This explains the continual differentiation of 
its activities, the suppleness and flexibility with which it at one time 
unfolds into a full system and at another expends its whole energy 
on a single problem and is always shifting its efforts to new tasks.
The boundary point has been reached from which the explica-
tion of the essence of philosophy can retrospectively illuminate its 
history and prospectively clarify its systematic coherence. Its history 
would be understood 1) if we could on the basis of the various 
415
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe essence of PHIlosoPHY (1907) 
247
functions of philosophy grasp the order in which its problems, as 
they aggregate and succeed each other, are generated under the con-
ditions of culture and then survey the possibilities of their solution; 
2) if we could describe the main stages in the progression of reflec-
tion of knowledge on itself; 3) if we could trace historically how 
the theories that emerged in the purposive systems of culture have 
been raised to the cognitive plane by philosophical efforts at com-
prehension and thereby advanced, as when philosophy creates new 
disciplines in the human sciences and then assigns them to special 
sciences; 4) and if history could be used to show how from the state 
of awareness of an epoch and the character of nations insight could 
be had about the particular forms adopted by philosophical world- 
views while also recognizing that there is a constant advance of the 
great types of world- view. In this way the history of philosophy 
leaves systematic philosophical inquiry with the three problems of 
grounding, justifying, and interconnecting the particular sciences as 
well as the task of confronting the never- ending need for ultimate 
reflection about being, ground, value, purpose, and how they are 
linked in a world- view, whatever form and direction this confron-
tation takes.
416
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
PART V
THE TYPES OF WORLD- VIEW  
AND THEIR DEVELOPMENT  
IN METAPHYSICAL SYSTEMS
(1911)
Translated by  
James McMahon and Rudolf A. Makkreel
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Introduction
On the Conflict of Systems
1.
One of the main reasons for the persistence of skepticism is the 
anarchy of philosophical systems. There is a contradiction between 
the historical awareness of the boundless variety of such systems 
and the claim of each system to universal validity; this contradiction 
supports the spirit of skepticism more strongly than any system-
atic argument. The multiplicity of philosophical systems stretches 
endlessly and chaotically behind us and is still expanding around 
us. Whenever such systems have emerged, they have excluded and 
fought against each other. And there seems to be no hope of reach-
ing a decision among them.
The history of philosophy confirms that the antagonism among 
philosophical systems, religious views, and ethical principles has 
had the effect of increasing skepticism. The conflict among the older 
Greek explanations of the world led to the philosophy of doubt in 
the Greek age of enlightenment. When the campaigns of Alexander 
and the unification of various peoples into larger empires brought 
the diversities of customs, religions, life-  and world- perspectives to 
the attention of the Greeks, skeptical schools came into being; these 
schools also extended their destructive operations to the problems 
of theology— evil and theodicy, the conflict between the personal-
ities of deities, their infinity and perfection— and to the assump-
tions concerning the ethical goal of human beings. The universal 
validity of the belief- system of more recent European peoples and 
associated forms of philosophical dogmatism began to be seriously 
undermined when Muslims and Christians compared their con-
victions with each other at the court of the Hohenstaufen Frederick 
II, and the philosophy of Averroes and Aristotle became known to 
scholastic thinkers. And after antiquity was reborn, the actual mo-
tives of Greek and Roman writers were understood, and the age of 
discoveries increasingly revealed the diversity of climates, peoples, 
VIII, 75
76
This essay was first published in Max Frischeisen- Köhler, ed., Weltanschauung, 
Philosophie und Religion (Berlin: Verlag Reichl, 1911). In 1931 it was reprinted in 
Gesammelte Schriften, volume VIII. Pagination in the margins refers to the latter.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
252 
V
and ways of thinking that exist on our planet, human certainty 
concerning hitherto narrowly delimited convictions disappeared 
completely. Today, travelers inquire carefully about the most di-
verse kinds of beliefs; we register and analyze the powerful great 
phenomena of religious and metaphysical convictions in the priest-
hoods of the Orient, in the Greek city- states, or in the culture of 
Arabia. We look back upon an immeasurable field of the rubble left 
behind by religious traditions, metaphysical assertions, and demon-
strated systems. Through many centuries the human spirit has tested 
and explored possibilities of every kind in attempting to scientif-
ically ground, to poetically exhibit, or to religiously proclaim the 
interconnectedness of things. Now methodical, critical historical re-
search investigates every fragment, every relic, of this long effort by 
our race. One of these systems excludes the other, they refute each 
other, and none is able to prove itself. The archives of history do not 
confirm the peaceful conversations depicted in Raphael’s “School of 
Athens,” which was the expression of the eclectic tendency of those 
days. Thus, the contradiction between increasing historical aware-
ness and the claim of the various philosophies to universal validity 
has become more and more severe, and an attitude of amused curi-
osity about new philosophical systems has become more and more 
widespread, no matter what sort of following such a system can at-
tract, and no matter how long it is able to hold on to that following.
2.
But the doubts that have arisen due to progress in the development 
of historical consciousness reach much deeper than the skeptical con-
clusions from the conflict of human opinions. The predominant pre-
supposition of the historical thought of the Greeks and Romans was 
that there was just one closed type of human being, endowed with a 
determinate content. The same idea of man formed the foundation 
of the Christian doctrine of the first and second Adam, of the Son 
of Man. The natural system of the sixteenth century was still based 
on the same presupposition. This system discovered in Christianity 
an abstract, enduring paradigm of religion: natural theology. It ab-
stracted the doctrine of natural law from Roman jurisprudence, and 
a model of taste from the creations of Greek art. According to this 
natural system, constant and universal basic forms of social and legal 
orders, religious belief, and morality pervade all historical diversities. 
Its method of deriving a common denominator from the comparison 
of historical life forms and of abstracting a natural law, a natural 
77
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
253
theology, and a rational morality from the multiplicity of customs, le-
gal maxims, and theologies— a procedure that evolved from Hippias 
on through the Stoics and all through Roman law— still dominated 
the century of constructive philosophy.1 The analytic spirit of the 
eighteenth century prepared the way for the dissolution of this natu-
ral system.2 This analytic spirit arose in England, where the most lib-
eral surveys of barbarian and alien life- forms, customs, and modes of 
thought merged with the most empirical theories and the application 
of the analytical method to epistemology, ethics, and aesthetics. This 
spirit was brought to France by Voltaire and Montesquieu. Hume 
and d’Alembert, Condillac and Destut de Tracy took man to be a 
bundle of drives and associations, and saw in that bundle boundless 
possibilities for producing the most manifold forms amidst differ-
ences of climate, customs, and education. The classical expression 
of this mode of historical thinking is found in Hume’s works Nat-
ural History of Religion and Dialogue on Natural Religion. These 
eighteenth- century efforts led to the developmental thought that was 
to dominate the nineteenth century. From Buffon to Kant and La-
marck, we see the acquisition of cognition about the development 
of the earth and the succession of its various life- forms. At the same 
time, the study of cultural peoples generated epoch- making works 
and starting with Winckelmann, Lessing, and Herder these works 
made use of developmental ideas. Finally, the study of natural peo-
ples provided the intermediary link between the scientific doctrine 
of evolution and the insights of developmental history based on the 
political life, religion, law, customs, language, poetry, and literature of 
the peoples studied. Thus, the developmental- historical point of view 
could be applied to the study of the overall natural and historical 
development of human beings, and the type “man” disintegrated in 
this process of development.
The theory of development that arose in this way is necessarily 
bound up with the recognition of the relativity of every historical 
life- form. The absolute validity of any single form of life, any system 
of government, religion, or philosophy, vanishes when seen from 
1 Here Dilthey refers to seventeenth- century thinkers such as Descartes and 
Spinoza.
2 This “natural system” that began to break down in the eighteenth century is not 
to be equated with the world- view of “naturalism” that would continue to thrive. The 
natural system of the human sciences is associated with the theory of natural law and 
rooted in general philosophical and legal concepts going back to the Stoics.
Many of Dilthey’s historical writings stress the influence of the Stoics on modern 
philosophers such as Descartes and Spinoza.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
254 
V
the perspective that encompasses the whole earth and all past eras. 
Thus, the growth of historical consciousness is more thoroughly 
destructive of the belief in universal validity than surveying the con-
flicts among the philosophies that have tried to convincingly ex-
press the coherence of the world by means of a system of concepts. 
Philosophy must seek the inner coherence of what is cognizable, 
not in the world, but in human beings. To understand life as lived 
by human beings is our aspiration today. The manifold systems that 
strove to grasp the coherence of the world can now be clearly re-
lated to life. These manifold systems are among the most important 
and revealing creations of life. Thus, the same growth of histor-
ical consciousness that had such a destructive effect on the great 
systems, must help us remove the hard contradiction between the 
claim to universal validity in every philosophical system and the 
historical anarchy of these systems.
1. Life and World- View
1. Life
Life is the ultimate root of a world- view. Life is scattered over the 
earth in innumerable singular lives, and it is experienced anew 
in each individual. Because as a mere moment of the present, life 
eludes direct observation, it is retained in echoing memory. Yet as 
it has objectified itself in its manifestations, the very depths of life 
are more completely graspable in understanding and interpretation 
than in any reflexive awareness or apprehension through our own 
lived experience. Life, as we know it, is present to us in innumerable 
forms, and yet shows everywhere the same common features. I will 
focus on one of its various forms. At this point, I will not explain, 
and I will not classify. I will simply describe a state of affairs that 
we can all observe about ourselves. Each act of thinking, each inner 
or outer action, emerges like an arrowhead pressing forward. But 
I can also [suspend this] in the lived experience of a state of inner 
repose, be it in a dream, in play, diversion, or a mere looking on. In 
the calm alertness of a state of repose directed at the baseline of life, 
I regard other people and things, not merely as actual beings that 
stand in causal relationships with me and with each other. Instead, 
life- concerns go out from me in all directions; I respond to people 
and things, I take positions with respect to them, I fulfill their ex-
pectations of me and I expect something from them. Some make 
me happy, expand my existence, and increase my strength, while 
78
79
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
255
others exert pressure on me and limit me. And whenever the deter-
minateness of a specific forward- moving directedness leaves room 
for this responsiveness, human beings notice and feel these rela-
tions of concern. They regard a friend as a force that increases their 
own existence; every member of their family has a definite place in 
their life; and everything that surrounds them is understood as an 
objectification of life and spirit. The bench in front of their home 
and the tree that provides shade in their garden derive their essence 
and their meaning from this kind of objectification. Thus, the life of 
each individual creates its own world out of itself.
2. Life- Experience
Life- experience arises from reflection on life. The specific occurrences 
evoked when the drives and feelings within us encounter the sur-
rounding world and fate are consolidated as objective and general 
knowledge. Just as human nature is always the same, so the basic 
features of life- experience are also common to all. They include the 
transience of things human, and our ability in the midst of it, to 
still enjoy the moment. There is also the tendency in strong as well 
as in more limited human beings to overcome this transitoriness by 
building a firm framework for their existence. In weaker or melan-
choly natures dissatisfaction with this transience produces the long-
ing for something truly permanent in an invisible world. Then there 
is the driving power of the passions, which, like dreams, create fanta-
sies until they dissolve as illusory. This life- experience can structure 
itself differently in each individual, but its common substratum is 
formed by insights into the power of chance, of the corruptibility of 
everything that we possess or love, hate, or fear, and of the constant 
presence of death, which is all- powerful in determining for each of 
us the meaning and sense of life.
General life- experience results from the interconnectedness of 
individuals. From the regular repetition of individual experiences 
as human beings cooperate and succeed each other, a tradition of 
expressions for this general life- experience is formed, and these ex-
pressions achieve greater and greater precision and reliability over 
the course of time. Their reliability rests on the ever- increasing 
number of cases from which we draw conclusions, on the classifi-
cation of these cases under already- available generalizations, and 
on constant testing. Furthermore, the principles of life- experience 
affect us even in those cases in which they are not expressly brought 
to consciousness. Everything that governs us as custom, usage, or 
80
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
256 
V
tradition is based on such life- experiences. Nevertheless, for both 
individual and general life- experience, the mode of certainty and the 
character of its formulation are always completely different from 
scientific universal validity. Scientific thought can verify the proce-
dure on which its reliability rests, and it can formulate its principles 
precisely, and justify them; the origin of our knowledge of life can-
not be verified in this way, and it is impossible to draw up definite 
formulas for it.
Among these life- experiences is the fixed system of relationships 
in which the identity or selfsameness of the ego is connected with 
other persons and external objects. The reality of this self, of other 
persons, of the things around us, and of the regular relationships 
among them, form the framework of life- experience and of the em-
pirical consciousness that is formed in life- experience. The ego, as 
well as the persons and things around us, can be characterized as 
the constituent factors of empirical consciousness; and its stability 
lies in the relationships of these factors to each other. And no mat-
ter what procedures philosophical thought may use in abstracting 
from these individual factors or their relationships, they remain the 
determining presuppositions of life itself. These factors are as in-
destructible as life itself and as incapable of being changed by any 
thought, since they are founded in the life- experiences of innumera-
ble generations. Among the characteristics of these life- experiences 
that form the foundation for the reality of the external world and 
for my relations to it, some of the most important are that they limit 
my existence, exert a pressure on it that I cannot escape, and that 
they restrain my intentions in a way that was unexpected and that 
cannot be changed. Both the results of my inductions and the sum 
of my knowledge are based on these presuppositions grounded in 
empirical consciousness.
3. The Riddle of Life
Viewing the whole of things on the basis of changing life- experiences, 
the countenance of life shows itself to be full of contradictions: It is 
both spontaneous and lawful, reasonable and capricious. Life pres-
ents ever- new aspects, and while perhaps clear in detail, it is com-
pletely enigmatic as a whole. Human individuals who seek to bring 
their life- concerns and the experiences based on them together into 
one whole are unable to do so. Conception, birth, development, and 
death are at the heart of all those things that cannot be understood. 
As living beings, we know about death, but cannot understand 
81
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
257
it. From our first glance at a dead person, death remains the in-
comprehensible counterpart to life; and our attitude to the world as 
something other, alien, and fearsome, is based primarily on this. 
Thus there inheres in the fact of death a compulsion to imaginary 
fantasies that are supposed to make this fact understandable: be-
lief in the afterlife, ancestor- worship, and the cult of the departed 
generate the basic ideas of religious faith and of metaphysics. And 
the alienness of life increases as human beings experience, both in 
society and in nature, permanent struggle, constant annihilation of 
one creature by another, and the cruelty of everything that rules in 
nature. Strange contradictions manifest themselves and enter ever 
more strongly into consciousness in our life- experience and are 
never resolved: a general transitoriness versus our desire for some-
thing permanent; the power of nature versus the independence of 
our will; the finitude of all that exists in time and space versus our 
ability to exceed every limit. These riddles have occupied Egyptian 
and Babylonian priests as much as the sermons of today’s Chris-
tian clergy, Heraclitus as much as Hegel, Aeschylus’ Prometheus as 
much as Goethe’s Faust.
4. The Formative Laws of World- Views
Every great impression shows a human being a new side of life; the 
world is seen in a new light. When such experiences repeat them-
selves and coalesce, our moods or attitudes toward life are formed. 
Life as a whole receives from each life- concern a coloring and an 
interpretation in affective or melancholy souls— universal moods or 
modes of attunement arise. These change as life reveals new aspects 
to us; but certain life- moods will prevail in different individuals in 
accordance with their own nature. Some are attached to tangible, 
material things, and live to enjoy the present; others pursue, through 
chance and fate, great goals that give permanence to their existence; 
there are also solemn natures, who cannot abide the transience of 
what they love and possess, and for whom, therefore, life appears 
worthless, a tissue of vanities and dreams, or who seek something 
permanent beyond this world. Among the great life- moods, the most 
comprehensive are optimism and pessimism; but they take on var-
ious nuances. Thus, for someone who looks upon the world as a 
spectator, the world appears strange, a colorful, volatile drama. On 
the other hand, for those who direct their life according to a well- 
ordered plan, the same world is familiar and like a home; they stand 
firmly in the world and belong there.
82
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
258 
V
These life- moods involve innumerable nuances of attitude to 
the world that form the foundation for the development of world- 
views. On the basis of life- experiences in which the manifold life- 
concerns of individuals about their world are operative, these life- 
moods initiate attempts to solve the riddle of life. The higher forms 
of life- mood have established the especially effective procedure of 
attempting to understand an incomprehensible given by means of 
something that is more evident. What is evident becomes a means 
of understanding, a basis for explaining what is incomprehensible. 
Science analyzes, and having thus isolated homogeneous facts, devel-
ops universal relations from them; but religion, literature, and prim-
itive metaphysics express the meaning and sense of the whole. The 
former cognizes, the latter understand. This sort of interpretation of 
the world that clarifies its complex nature by means of something 
simpler begins in language. It is developed either by means of meta-
phor, which represents one viewpoint by means of another kindred 
viewpoint that somehow makes it more illuminating, or by means 
of personification, which brings a thing closer and makes it under-
standable by humanizing it, or by means of analogies, which deter-
mine a less familiar thing on the basis of its affinity with something 
familiar, and thereby approximates scientific thought. Wherever re-
ligion, myth, literature, or primitive metaphysics try to make things 
understandable and impressive, this is the procedure used.
5. The Structure of a World- View
All world- views that undertake to give a complete solution to the 
riddle of life regularly contain the same structure. This structure is 
always a complex nexus in which on the basis of a world- picture 
questions about the meaning and sense of the world are decided, 
and ideals, the highest good, and the governing principles for the 
conduct of life are derived. This structure is determined by the laws 
of the psyche; according to these laws, our conception of what is 
actual in the course of life underlies the evaluation of whether con-
ditions and objects are pleasurable or displeasurable, satisfying or 
dissatisfying, worthy of approval or disapproval. This evaluation 
of life then becomes in turn a supporting level for determinations of 
the will. Our attitude regularly goes through these three phases of 
consciousness, and in this process the most characteristic aspect 
of psychic life is validated: It is a productive system in which the 
underlying level remains active and endures. The relationships that 
inhere in the behavioral patterns according to which I judge objects, 
83
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
259
take pleasure in them, and direct myself to something in them to be 
further actualized, serve to define how the various layers are strat-
ified. They constitute the structure of a configuration in which the 
overall productive nexus of psychic life finds its expression. Lyric 
poetry shows this nexus in its simplest form: a situation, a series of 
feelings, and often resulting from them a desire, a striving, an ac-
tion. Every life- relationship develops into a framework in which the 
same kinds of attitude are structurally connected. And thus world- 
views are also regular configurations in which this structure of psy-
chic life is expressed. Their substrate is always a world- picture that 
arises from our conceptual attitude as it proceeds according to the 
lawful stages of cognition. Having observed inner processes and 
external objects, we clarify the resulting perceptions by means of 
elementary operations of thought in order to articulate the basic 
structures of actual reality. Once the perceptions pass, they are rep-
resented and ordered in a conceptual world that raises us above 
the fortuitousness of perceptions. With these steps we achieve an 
increasing [cognitive] stability and a spiritual freedom; this domin-
ion over actual reality is completed in a region of judgments and 
concepts in which the coherence and essence of what is actual are 
grasped as universally valid. 
When a world- view attains full development, it usually happens 
first in these stages of cognizing what is actual. And then another 
typical attitude is built on this, in an analogous lawful series of steps. 
In feeling ourselves, we enjoy the value of our existence; we attribute 
a productive value to the objects and persons around us because they 
raise and expand our existence. We determine these values accord-
ing to the potential of the objects to aid or harm us. In evaluating 
them we seek an absolute standard of assessment. Thus conditions, 
persons, and things receive a meaning in relation to the actual world 
as a whole, and this whole itself receives a sense. When these stages 
of feeling- relationships are run through, a second layer is formed in 
the structure of the world- view; a world- picture becomes the basis 
for evaluating life and understanding the world. And in accordance 
with the same laws of psychic life there emerges from the evaluation 
of life and the understanding of the world a highest level of con-
sciousness. Here we see the ideals, the highest good, and the supreme 
principles through which a world- view obtains, for the first time, its 
practical energy. With this the world- view reaches the tipping point 
whereby it bores its way into human life, into the external world, 
and into the depths of the soul itself. The world- view now becomes 
formative, creative, and reformative! And this highest level of the 
84
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
260 
V
world- view also develops through various stages. From intention, 
striving, and inclination, enduring ends are posited that are directed 
at realizing representations, means- end relations, choosing among 
ends, the selection of the means, and finally the bringing together of 
the purposes in the highest order of our practical attitude in a com-
prehensive life- plan, a highest good, the supreme norms of action, an 
ideal of shaping both personal life and society.
That is the structure of the world- view. What the riddle of life 
presents as confused, as a bundle of problems to be solved, is now 
raised to a conscious and necessary system of problems and solu-
tions. This progression occurs in accordance with a lawfully self- 
determining sequence. From this it follows that every world- view 
has a development, and that in this development it achieves an expli-
cation of what was implicit in it. Thus gradually and in the course 
of time it obtains permanence, stability, and strength. It is a product 
of history.
6. The Diversity of World- Views
World- views develop under various conditions such as climate and 
race. The way nations are influenced by history and their political or-
ganization, and the temporally conditioned limitations that epochs 
and eras impose on how nations cooperate also provide special con-
ditions that affect the emergence of a diversity among world- views. 
The life that arises under such specialized conditions is very differ-
ent, as are the human beings that grasp that life. And in addition to 
these typical differences, there are also those of individual persons, 
of their milieu, and of their life- experience. Just as the earth is pop-
ulated by innumerable forms of living beings, among whom there 
is a constant struggle for existence and for room to expand, so in 
the human world we see world- views assume different shapes that 
struggle with each other to claim power over us.
Now a lawful relation asserts itself according to which human 
souls, distressed by the restless alternation of impressions and the 
fateful consequences of the power of the external world, must strive 
for inner stability in order to withstand all this. Away from change 
and instability, from the inconstancy and flux of their own disposi-
tion and views of life, human beings are led toward enduring evalu-
ations of life and toward firm goals. World- views that further the 
understanding of life and lead to useful life- goals endure and drive 
out lesser world- views. Thus a selection is made among them. And in 
the course of generations, the viable ones among these world- views 
85
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
261
assume an ever more complete shape. Just as the same structure is 
efficacious in many different living organisms, so world- views are 
formed according to the same schema.
The deepest mystery of the specification of world- views lies in the 
uniformity impressed on their particular structures by the teleolog-
ical nexus of psychic life. Amidst the apparent contingency of these 
configurations, there exists in each of them a purposive system that 
arises from the interdependence of the questions contained in the 
riddle of life, and especially from the constant relationship among 
a world- picture, the evaluation of life, and the goals of the will. A 
common human nature and an ordering of individuation stand in 
stable life- relations to what is actual; they involve life- concerns that 
are always and everywhere the same; thus, life always shows the 
same aspects.
To the structural regularity of world- views and their differentia-
tion into singular forms, we must add an incalculable moment due 
to the variations of life, the succession of eras, changes in the scien-
tific situation, the genius of nations and individuals. These factors 
bring out a continual shift of interest in the problems that grow 
out of historical life and of the power of certain ideas that come to 
dominate it. Ever new combinations of life- experience, moods, and 
thoughts are always affecting world- view configurations relative to 
the place they occupy in history. These combinations are irregular, 
not only in terms of their constituents, but also in terms of their 
significance and importance within the whole. But due to the law-
fulness of their underlying structure and their logical order, they are 
not aggregates, but integral configurations.
Moreover, it becomes clear that when these configurations are 
compared they fall into groups that have a certain relationship to 
each other. Just as languages, religions, and states, when analyzed 
by the comparative method, reveal certain types, lines of develop-
ment, and rules of transformation, the same can be shown to be 
true of world- views. These types pass through a historically condi-
tioned pattern of singular constellations. They are everywhere con-
ditioned by what is distinctive about the region in which they arise. 
But to claim that this fully determines them was a serious error of 
the constructive method. Only the comparative historical method is 
capable of coming close to setting up such types— their variations, 
their development, and their cross- fertilization. Hence scholarship 
in this area must always view its results with a mind open to the pos-
sibility of further refinement. Every tabulation is only provisional 
and remains merely a means of achieving deeper historical insight. 
86
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
262 
V
And always associated with the comparative historical method is 
the preparation for this procedure by systematic considerations and 
the interpretation of historical content based on them. This kind of 
historical- systematic and psychological interpretation of the con-
tent of history is also prone to make the mistake of constructive 
thinking, [as when it is assumed] that in each region a simple for-
mative drive could account for the configuration [of a world- view.]
I summarize all that is known so far in one main thesis that is con-
firmed by comparative historical considerations in every particular: 
World- views are not products of thought. They do not arise from 
the mere will to cognize. Conceiving what is actual is an important 
moment in their formation, but it is only one moment. World- views 
are rooted in life- conduct, life- experience, and the overall structure 
of our psychic life. Elevating life to consciousness in cognizing what 
is actual, evaluating it, and exercising the will is a difficult task that 
humanity has slowly achieved in the development of life- views.
This main thesis of the theory of world- views is confirmed when 
we consider the course of history as a whole; at the same time, 
the course of history confirms an important consequence of our 
thesis. This consequence leads us back to the beginning of this es-
say, where it was maintained that the formation of world- views 
is determined by the will to achieve stability in the world- picture, 
evaluation of life, and guidance of the will that emerge from the 
stages of psychological development. Religion and philosophy seek 
stability, efficacy, control, universal validity. But humanity has not 
advanced a single step on this path. The struggle among world- views 
has not been resolved on any core issue. History serves to select 
among them, but its great types uphold themselves alongside each 
other as autocratic, indemonstrable and indestructible. They cannot 
owe their origin to any demonstration, since they cannot be refuted 
by any demonstration. Specific stages and special formulations of a 
type may be refuted, but its rootedness in life endures and continues 
to be active and is always producing new configurations.
2. The Types of World- View in Religion, Poetry, 
and Metaphysics
I begin with a difference in world- views that is conditioned by the 
cultural domains in which they arise. The domains of economy, so-
cial life, law, and government form the foundation of culture. In 
all these domains there is a division of labor according to which 
each specific person performs a defined task in a specific sphere of 
87
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
263
operation. Here the will is restricted to given, limited tasks that are 
assigned to it by the purposive system of a domain. Science uses 
cognition to rationally regulate work in this practical life- nexus; 
hence it is very closely connected with praxis. And since it too is 
subject to the law of the division of labor, every researcher sets for 
himself a limited task within a definite domain, and at a definite 
place in the work of cognition. Even philosophy itself is subject to 
this division of labor in part of its functions. However, a religious, lit-
erary, or metaphysical genius lives in a region that is removed from 
social bonds, from working on limited tasks, from subordinating 
oneself to that which is achievable within the limits of one’s time 
and historical situation. Any consideration on their part of such a 
restriction adulterates an understanding of life that should be able 
to face the “given” with an unfettered and sovereign attitude. Their 
understanding of life becomes untrue if their view is too limited, 
their temporal frame too restrictive, and their attitude too tenden-
tious. Worthwhile and powerful world- views arise and develop in 
such a region of freedom.
Religious, artistic, and metaphysical world- views do however 
differ from each other in terms of their law of formation, their struc-
ture, and their types.
 1. The Religious World- View
Religious world- views arise from a distinctive life- concern of hu-
man beings. Beyond what primitive man could control, whether 
as warrior, hunter, or worker of the soil, to bring about changes in 
the external world by physical exertions with a rational purpose, 
there extends a sphere in which things cannot be affected by such 
exertions and which our cognition cannot reach. And yet it seems 
that forces proceed from this sphere that give men luck in hunting, 
success in war, or a good harvest, just as with sickness, madness, old 
age, death, the loss of wives, children, or herds, they find themselves 
dependent on something unfamiliar. From this arises the technique 
of trying to influence this incomprehensible force, which could not 
be controlled by any physical activity, by means of prayers, offer-
ings, or submission. These people would like to absorb into them-
selves the powers of higher beings, to achieve a good relation to 
them, to unite with them. The actions directed to this end constitute 
the original cult and lead to the vocation of the sorcerer, the tradi-
tional healer, or the priest. As their profession becomes better orga-
nized, it gathers certain artifices, experiences, and knowledge, and 
88
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
264 
V
a particular life- style arises that separates it from the other members 
of society. Thus in the small closed communities of the horde and 
the tribe there arises a tradition of religious life- experience developed 
in communication with higher beings, and of a spiritual ordering of 
life; and from magical cult- actions there is a gradual development 
of this superstitious religiosity into a religious process in which the 
mind and will of human beings, by means of an internal discipline, 
are made subject to the divine will. The decisive moment occurs 
when primitive religious ideas develop on the terrain of universally 
recurring experiences such as birth, death, sickness, dreams, madness, 
harmful and beneficial incursions of the demonic into the course of 
life. Some religious ideas draw on strange mixtures of order in nature 
that are always taken to entail a teleological relation of the spectator 
to nature, and others draw on chance, destructive force, and conflict. 
The alter ego in each person, the divine powers in the heavens, the 
sun and the stars, the demonic aspects of forests, swamps, and riv-
ers: These root images influenced by life- concerns are the source of 
an emotionally conditioned fantasy life, which is then nourished by 
ever new religious experiences. The efficacy of the invisible is the fun-
damental category of elementary religious life. Analogical thinking 
combines religious ideas with teachings about the origin of the world 
and human life, and about the origin of the human soul.
An efficacy in things and people stemming from the supernatural 
gives them their religious meaning. These things and people are nat-
ural, visible, destructible, limited; and yet they are the seat of divine 
or demonic effects. The world is filled with a religious relationship 
between, on the one hand, concrete finite things and specific people, 
and on the other hand, the invisible. In accordance with this rela-
tionship, the religious meaning of these things and people resides 
in the efficacy of the invisible, which is hidden in them. Holy sites, 
holy persons, divine images or idols, symbols and sacraments are all 
examples of this relationship; its significance in religion is the same 
as that of the symbolic in art and the conceptual in metaphysics. 
And because of the obscurity of its origin, tradition becomes an 
extraordinarily powerful force within the religious relationship.
This is the basis for all further religious development. While a 
common spirit is the primary force in the earlier stages, the pro-
gression to higher stages is brought about by the religious genius in 
mysteries, hermetic existence, and prophecy. Beyond specific inter-
actions between humans and higher beings, there is in the religious 
genius an inner relationship of the whole person to these beings. 
89
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
265
This concentrated religious experience brings the elementary reli-
gious ideas together into religious world- views, whose essence is to 
derive the meaning of what is actual, the value of life, and the prac-
tical ideal from a relationship to the invisible. They are contained 
in figurative language and in dogmas of faith. They are based on a 
life- attitude, and they develop in prayer and meditation.
All typical configurations of these religious world- views have 
in themselves from the very beginning the opposition between be-
neficent and evil beings, between material existence and the higher 
world.
The main types of the manifold religious world- views [posit ei-
ther an] an immanence of world- reason in the order of life and the 
course of nature, or a spiritual All- One that provides the connected-
ness, truth, and value of all that has been dispersed into particular 
existing beings and to which they must return, or a creative divine 
will that brings forth the world and creates man in its own image 
or stands in opposition to a realm of evil and enlists the pious into 
its service for this struggle. And just as, from the very beginning, 
communion with the invisible is separated from being engaged in 
and enjoying the institutions of earthly social existence, so these 
religious world- views are always in conflict with the worldly view 
of life. An elementary naturalism frequently asserts itself in the 
worldly view of life because of this conflict; it gets its energy and 
power precisely from the contrast with the religious world- views.
Thus in religious times we see the struggle between types that 
show a definite kinship with those of metaphysics. Judeo- Christian 
monotheism, the Chinese and Indian form of panentheism, and, in 
contrast with these, the naturalistic position in life and the natural-
istic way of thinking, are the preliminary stages and the point of 
departure for the further development of metaphysics. But religious 
rites with their magic, religious powers, holy persons, and shrines 
as well as the imagery of religious symbolism always form the back-
ground of the religious world- views, just as the common people 
provide the broad base of ecclesiastical communal life. Inherent in 
these world- views there is an obscure, specifically religious nucleus 
that the conceptual work of the theologians can never elucidate 
or ground. It is impossible to overcome the one- sidedness of an 
experience arising from an interaction with higher beings that is 
characterized by pleading, requesting, and sacrificing one’s own-
ness, and which derives the attributes of these beings from how the 
life- concerns of the soul relate to them.
90
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
266 
V
From this there develops a relationship, according to which the 
religious world- view is the preparation for but can never simply 
go over into the metaphysical world- view. To be sure, the Judeo- 
Christian doctrine of a purely spiritual, freely creating God, and 
of the soul fashioned in the image of that God, was transformed 
into the monotheistic idealism of freedom; the various forms of the 
religious All- One doctrine prepared the way for the panentheism of 
metaphysics; the schema of a manifold world proceeding from the 
One and returning to it, which originated in Indian speculations, in 
the mysteries, and in Gnosticism, was then developed by the Neo- 
Platonists, Bruno, Spinoza, and Schopenhauer. And the continuum 
that leads from monotheism to the scholastic philosophy of Jewish, 
Arab, and Christian thinkers, and from them to Descartes, Wolff, 
and Kant, and then the philosophers of the reactionary period in 
the nineteenth century, is equally clear. But no matter how closely 
theological conceptual work on the religious world- views may ap-
proximate that of metaphysics, nevertheless its formative law and 
its structure always distinguish it from metaphysical thought. The 
one- sided point of view of the religious life- attitude is its limita-
tion. The religious mind always thinks it is in the right concerning 
its experiences. A more progressive spirit acknowledges that the 
soul’s fixation on the supernatural world (this historical product of 
priestly technique) once strongly supported idealism, but by means 
of an artificial transference; it also brought about the disciplining 
of life, but with ascetic severity. The advance of spirit in history 
requires more open positions with respect to life and to the world, 
positions that are not tied to traditions arising from obscure, ques-
tionable origins.
2. The Positions of World- Views in Literature
In religion, things and people received their significance through 
faith in the presence of a supernatural efficacy in them. The sig-
nificance of a work of art lies in the fact that something singular, 
something given in the senses, is extracted from the nexus of what 
has been produced and what is still productive and raised to be-
come the ideal expression of life- concerns as they speak to us on the 
basis of color and form, symmetry and proportion, tonal harmony 
and rhythm, psychic process and event. Does this tend to generate a 
world- view? Artistic creation as such has nothing in common with 
such a tendency; but the relation between the artist’s life- attitude 
and his work nevertheless introduces a secondary relation between 
91
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
267
a work of art and a world- view. Art first flowers under the influence 
of religion. Its first subject matters are religious; the aims of the re-
ligious community are expressed in architecture and music. In this 
connection, art has raised the content of religiosity to the realm of 
eternity, in which transitory dogmas disappear. The inner form of 
sublime art proceeds from this content, as is shown by Giotto’s reli-
gious epic paintings, by great church architecture, and by the music 
of Bach and Handel. And the historical progression of the relation-
ship of art to world- views shows that after the religious deepening 
of art, the life- attitude of the artist could come to free expression in 
it. This life- attitude is not to be regarded as imposed on the work 
of art, but as rooted in the inner form of an artistic configuration. 
A remarkable attempt has been made to prove this in the area of 
painting, and to demonstrate the effect upon the form of paintings 
of the typical life- attitudes, from which the naturalistic, heroic, and 
panentheistic world- view arise.3 A similar relation could also be 
demonstrated in musical creation. And when spiritually powerful 
artists like Michelangelo, Beethoven or Richard Wagner proceed to 
develop a world- view on the basis of an inner drive, this will serve 
to reinforce the expression of their life- attitude in artistic form.
But among the arts, poetry has a special relation to a world- view, 
for the medium of language in which it operates, makes possible 
a lyrical, epic, or dramatic presentation of everything that can be 
seen, heard, or experienced. I will not attempt here to define the es-
sence and function of poetry. By removing an event from the nexus 
of volitional concerns and transforming its representation in this 
world of appearances into an expression of the nature of life, po-
etry frees the soul from the burden of actual existence, and at the 
same time reveals its meaning. By fate and their own life- decisions, 
human beings are enclosed within the limits of the determinate-
ness of life; but by satisfying their secret longing to imaginatively 
explore life- possibilities that they cannot otherwise realize, poetry 
expands their selves and the horizon of their lived experiences. It 
opens a view into a higher and stronger world. With this we come 
to the fundamental relation on which poetry is based: Life is its 
point of departure, and life- concerns about people, things, and na-
ture are made central. Thus universal life- moods come into being 
from the need to bring together the experiences that derive from 
life- concerns, and the overall essence of what is experienced in in-
dividual life- concerns is the poetic consciousness of the meaning 
3 See Herman Nohl, Die Weltanschauungen der Malerei (Jena, 1908).
92
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
268 
V
of life. Such universal life- moods feed into the book of Job and 
the Psalms, the choruses of Attic tragedy, the sonnets of Dante and 
Shakespeare, the grandiose ending of the Divine Comedy, the great 
lyric poetry of Goethe, Schiller, and the Romantics, Goethe’s Faust, 
Wagner’s Nibelungen, and Hölderlin’s Empedocles. Thus poetry, 
unlike science, does not try to cognize what is actual, but rather 
to let us see the significance of events, people, and things from the 
perspective of life- concerns. The riddle of life is concentrated in an 
inner nexus of life- concerns that interweaves human beings, their 
fates, and life- environment. In every great epoch of literature there 
occurs anew, in regular stages, a progression from local beliefs and 
customs that develop from the general life- experience of commu-
nities to the task of once again making life understandable from 
itself. That was the path from Homer to the Attic tragedians, from 
a submissive Catholic faith to the chivalrous lyric and epic, and 
from modern life to Schiller, Balzac, and Ibsen. Corresponding to 
this progression is the order in which literary forms develop: the 
epic appears first, then drama brings about the highest degree of 
concentration by bringing the concerns created by life through plot, 
character, and fate together into one view of life; finally, the novel 
reveals the infinite fullness of life and expresses a consciousness of 
the meaning of life.
Let us draw some conclusions! The emergence of poetry from 
life leads it to directly express a life- view in presenting an event. 
This life- view arises in poets from the nature of life itself, grasped 
on the basis of their own life- attitude. This is developed in the his-
tory of poetry and literature as it gradually approaches its goal of 
understanding life from itself when poets let the great impressions 
of life act on them with full freedom. Thus life is always reveal-
ing new aspects of itself in poetry: it reveals infinite possibilities 
for seeing, evaluating, and creatively advancing life. An event be-
comes a symbol, not for thought, but for seeing the coherence of life 
through the life- experience of the poet. Thus Stendhal and Balzac 
see in life a web of illusions, passions, beauty, and decay created by 
dark impulses rooted in a nature without purpose; a web in which 
the strong will is victorious. Goethe sees in life a creative force that 
unites organic formations, human development, and the orders of 
society into one worthwhile coherent whole. Corneille and Schiller 
see life as the stage for heroic deeds. And for each of these life- 
attitudes there is a corresponding inner form of literature. From 
there it is only one step to the great types of world- view, and the 
93
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
269
connection between literature and philosophical movements leads 
people like Balzac, Goethe, or Schiller to this highest point in the 
understanding of life. Thus the types of poetic world- view prepare 
the way for those of metaphysics. Conversely, they can make meta-
physical world- views accessible to society at large.
3. The Types of World- View in Metaphysics
All the threads now come together in the theory of the structure, 
types, and development of world- views in metaphysics. I will sum-
marize the relations that are decisive here.
1. The whole process of the genesis and consolidation of world- views 
leads to the demand of raising them to the status of universally- valid 
knowledge. Already in those poets who have the greatest ability as 
thinkers, great impressions seem again and again to impart a new il-
lumination to life, but the drive toward consolidation leads beyond 
them. At the core of all world- religions there remains something bi-
zarre and extreme that stems from heightened religious experiences 
and from the fixation of the soul on the invisible, a fixation that 
is rooted in priestcraft and is not accessible to reason. Orthodoxy 
insists on this; mysticism and spiritualism seek to retrieve it in lived 
experience; rationalism wants to conceive it and must decompose 
it; thus the will- to- power of the world- religions, which had been 
based upon the inner experience of the faithful and tradition and 
authority, is replaced by the demand that world- views be reshaped 
in accordance with a rationally based validity. When world- views 
are elevated to a conceptual coherence, when they are scientifically 
grounded and claim to be universally valid, metaphysics comes into 
being. History shows that wherever metaphysics appears, religious 
development prepares the way for it, and that it is influenced by 
poetry or literature and affected by national life- attitudes and their 
evaluation of life and ideals. The will to universally- valid knowl-
edge gives this new form of world- view its distinctive structure.
Who could say at what point the will to cognize that affects all 
purposive systems of society becomes “science?” It was in the Io-
nian colonies that the mathematical and astronomical knowledge 
of the Babylonians and Egyptians was first separated from practical 
applications and from its connection with the priesthood. With this 
new independence, inquiry made the totality of the world its object 
and allowed philosophy and science, both in their beginning stages, 
94
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
270 
V
to enter into a very close relation with each other. Mathematics, as-
tronomy, and geography became the means of cognizing the world. 
The old problem of the solution to the riddle of life occupied the 
Pythagoreans and Heraclitus just as it had occupied the priests of 
the East. And when, in the Ionian colonies, the advancing power 
of the natural sciences had made the problem of explaining nature 
the central concern of philosophy, the result was that as philosophy 
developed further, all the great questions contained in the “riddle of 
the world” were discussed in the various schools. All of them turned 
their attention to the inner connectedness, for both individual and 
society, of the cognition of what is actual, the direction of life, and 
guidance of the will. In short, they were all aiming at the formula-
tion of a world- view.
The structure of world- views in metaphysics was determined 
at first by their connection with science. The simple world- picture 
based on the senses was transformed into an astronomical world- 
picture; the world of feeling and acts of will was objectified into 
concepts of values, goods, purposes, and rules; the demand for 
conceptual form and grounding led those who thought about the 
“riddle of the world” to logic and epistemology as fundamental. 
Work on the riddle itself led from conditioned and finite givens 
to a universal being, a first cause, a highest good, and an ultimate 
purpose; metaphysics became a system that worked on the insuffi-
cient representations and concepts that were developed in both life 
and science in order to fashion auxiliary concepts that exceeded all 
experience.
In addition to the relation of metaphysics to science, there is also 
its relation to worldly culture. By immersing itself in the spirit of 
every purposive system of a culture, philosophy gains new powers 
from it and at the same time imparts it with the energy of its basic 
thought. Philosophy defines the procedural methods and the cog-
nitive value of the sciences. Unmethodical life- experiences and the 
literature about them are developed into a general assessment of life. 
The basic concepts of law that emerged from the practice of law are 
raised by philosophy to a unified system; maxims about the func-
tions of the state, and about the constitutional forms they assume 
over time as a result of the techniques of political life, are related 
by philosophy to the most exalted tasks of human society. Philoso-
phy also undertakes to test dogmas to see whether they are capable 
of proof, but when the obscure core of a dogma is not accessible 
to conceptual thought, philosophy fulfills its historically destruc-
tive work. Philosophy rationalizes the forms and rules of artistic 
95
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
271
practices by assigning a purpose to art. Everywhere philosophy tries 
to guide society by means of thought.
And now a final concern. Each of these metaphysical systems is 
conditioned by the place that it occupies in the history of philoso-
phy; it relies on one perspective on the problems and is determined 
by the concepts that proceed from it.
Therefore, these metaphysical systems possess a [dual] structure 
that discloses their logical coherence and at the same time their var-
iously conditioned irregularities. These systems are representative 
by expressing a definite position of scientific thought in determi-
nate systems, but they are also singular in nature. Hence any great 
metaphysical system becomes a multifaceted whole that illuminates 
every part of the life to which it belongs.
A single universally- valid system of metaphysics is the goal 
of this great movement. The differentiation of metaphysics that 
arises from the depths of life seems to these thinkers to be merely 
a contingent and subjective accretion that must be eliminated. The 
enormous amount of work that goes into the creation of an unam-
biguously demonstrable conceptual system in which the riddle of 
life could then be methodically solved takes on a significance of its 
own; each system takes its place in the advance toward this goal 
in terms of how it contributed to the conceptual work. And this 
work occurs in the cultured nations of Europe— first in the Medi-
terranean states, and then, since the Renaissance, in the Germanic 
and Romance states— and it is carried out by an upper class that is 
only occasionally influenced in this work by the prevailing religios-
ity and that strives to remove itself increasingly from such influence.
2. In this context, differences occur in the systems that are based on 
the rational character of metaphysical work. Some of them indicate 
stages in the development of metaphysics, such as those of dogma-
tism and criticism. Other differences pervade the whole course of its 
development; they arise from the attempt of metaphysics to present 
in a systematic way all that is contained in the apprehension of ac-
tual reality, the assessment of life, and the setting of purposes, and 
they have as their object the possibilities of solving these main prob-
lems. If we consider the ways in which metaphysics is grounded, 
we encounter the opposition of empiricism and rationalism, realism 
and idealism. What is actual can be approached from the point of 
view of the opposed concepts of the one and the many, being and 
becoming, causality and teleology, and these differences find their 
match in the systems. The various vantage points from which the 
96
97
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
272 
V
relations of the world to its foundation and of body and soul are 
conceived, are expressed in the positions of deism and pantheism, 
materialism and spiritualism. The problems of practical philosophy 
lead to the formulation of further distinctions, of which I will men-
tion eudaemonism and its further development in utilitarianism, 
and the doctrine of an unconditional rule of the moral world. All 
these distinctions have their place in the special domains of meta-
physics, and they designate possibilities of subjecting these domains 
to rational thought on the basis of opposing concepts. They can all 
be seen in the context of such systematic work as hypotheses by 
means of which the spirit of metaphysics approaches a universally- 
valid system.
And thus, finally, attempts were made to classify metaphysical 
systems from this point of view. A two- fold division of these sys-
tems, opposing the realistic and idealistic point of view, or some-
thing similar, accords best with the conceptual oppositions prevail-
ing in the reflection that is grounded in the nature of formulating 
metaphysical concepts.
Who could ignore the importance of what this conceptual phil-
osophical work has accomplished in the various domains? It pre-
pares the way for the independent sciences, and it also gathers them 
together. I have spoken of this in detail elsewhere. But what sepa-
rates these accomplishments of metaphysics from the work of the 
positive sciences is the will to subject the totality of the universe, 
and life itself, to the scientific methods that have been developed for 
the special domains of knowledge. Metaphysical inferences about 
the unconditioned exceed the bounds of the procedural methods 
of the special sciences.
3. At this point it is possible to make clear the basic idea from which 
my attempt at a theory of world- views has proceeded and which also 
defines this work. It is historical consciousness that leads us back 
behind the striving of the metaphysicians toward a universally- valid 
system, behind the resulting distinctions that separate thinkers, and, 
finally, behind comprehending these distinctions in terms of classi-
fications. Historical consciousness places the actually- existing con-
flict of the systems in their overall context. It examines the overall 
structures of these systems in relation to the developmental course 
of religion and literature. It shows that all metaphysical concep-
tual work has made not a single step forward toward a uniform 
system. Thus we see that the conflict of metaphysical systems is, in 
98
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
273
the long run, grounded in life itself, in life- experience, in responses 
to the problem of life. The multiplicity of systems, and the possibil-
ity of distinguishing certain types among them, are based on these 
responses. Each of these types encompasses cognition of what is 
actual, an evaluation of life, and the setting of ends. They are inde-
pendent of the form of the antithesis in which the basic problems 
are solved from opposite points of view.
The essence of these types is clearly evident when we look at 
the great metaphysical geniuses, who have expressed their personal 
concepts of life in conceptual systems that claim validity. Their typ-
ical life- attitude is one with their character, and it is expressed in the 
way they order their life. It animates all their actions and manifests 
itself in their style. And although their systems are obviously con-
ditioned by the level of the concepts in which they are expressed, 
from the historical point of view these concepts are only means for 
constructing and justifying their world- view.
Spinoza begins his Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect 
with the life- experience of the futility of the sorrow and joy, the fear 
and hope, of everyday life. He resolves to seek the true good that 
would grant eternal joy, and in his Ethics he accomplishes this task 
by eliminating our bondage to the passions by cognizing God, who 
is the immanent worldly source of the multitude of transitory things. 
By means of this intellectual, infinite love for God that results from 
this cognition, God, the infinite, loves himself in finite human spirit. 
Fichte’s whole development is the expression of a typical psychic at-
titude: The moral independence of the person with respect to nature 
and the overall course of the world. Hence the last pronouncement 
with which the great act of will that constitutes Fichte’s stormy life 
breaks off, concerns the ideal of the heroic human being. In such 
a person the highest achievements of human nature manifested in 
history as the arena of moral life are linked with the supernatural 
order of things. And the immeasurable historical effect of Epicurus, 
who was intellectually far inferior to the greatest thinkers, lies in 
the pure clarity with which he expressed a typical psychic attitude. 
It lies in a serene subordination of human beings to the lawful order 
of nature and a joyous yet thoughtful enjoyment of nature’s gifts.
Understood in this way, every genuine world- view offers an 
intuitive insight that arises from being- immersed- in- life itself. 
Hegel’s early notes, which arose from the interaction between 
his religious- metaphysical experiences and the interpretation of 
early Christian documents, exemplify such intuitive insights. This 
99
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
274 
V
being- immersed- in- life finds its completion in taking a stance on 
life and in life- concerns. That is also the deeper meaning of the au-
dacious saying that the poet is the true human being. By taking a 
stance on life, certain facets of the world are disclosed. I will not 
presume to go any further here. We do not know the formative 
law by which the differentiation of metaphysical systems proceeds 
from life. If we wish to come to a proper conception of the types 
of world- view, we must turn to history. And the essential thing that 
history has to teach us is to grasp the connection between life and 
metaphysics, to transpose ourselves into life as the core of these 
systems, to be aware of the great connections among systems, con-
nections that pervade history; there is a typical attitude in all the 
systems, no matter how they are differentiated or classified. The 
important thing is to see more deeply on the basis of life, to follow 
up on the great intentions of metaphysics.
This is also the sense in which I propose a distinction among 
three main types. There is no other tool for such a classification 
other than historical comparison. The point of departure is the fact 
that every metaphysical thinker, faced with the riddle of life, un-
winds its tangle from a definite point of view. This point of view 
is conditioned by the thinker’s attitude to life from which the par-
ticular structure of his system is formed. We can classify the systems 
into groups according to their relations of dependence, affinity, re-
ciprocal attraction, or repulsion. But here we encounter a difficulty 
that underlies all historical comparison. Such comparison must 
establish an anticipatory standard for the selection of features to 
be compared, and this standard then determines the rest of the pro-
cess. Hence what I propose here is only provisional. The core of 
my proposal is only an intuition that comes from long study of 
metaphysical systems. The very way in which it is given a histori-
cal formulation makes it subjective in character. Whether a differ-
ent logical arrangement results if both forms of idealism are taken 
together or objective idealism is united with naturalism— this and 
other possibilities I leave open to question. This distinction of types 
is only intended to allow a deeper view into history from the point 
of view of life.
100
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
275
3. Naturalism
1.
Human beings find themselves determined by nature. Nature in-
cludes our own bodies as well as the external world. And it is pre-
cisely the state of our own bodies and the powerful animal drives 
dominating it that determine our attitude toward life. The view of life 
and mode of behavior according to which our life- course consists in 
satisfying animal drives and remains subject to the external world 
from which we draw sustenance is as old as the human race. In hun-
ger, in the sexual drive, in aging and in dying, we see ourselves as 
subject to the daemonic powers of nature. We are nature. Heraclitus 
and the apostle Paul use similar contemptuous language to call this 
the life- view of the sensual masses. It is enduring; there has never 
been a time in which it did not dominate some part of humanity. 
Even in the times of the sternest rule of the oriental priesthood, this 
life- philosophy of the sensual man existed; and when Catholicism 
was suppressing any theoretical expression of this point of view, 
there was much talk of “Epicureans.” What could not be expressed 
in philosophical treatises found expression in the songs of Proven-
cal troubadours, in German courtly poetry, and in the Tristan epics 
of both France and Germany. And just as Plato described the life of 
pleasure of the nobles and rich men of his time, and their doctrine 
of pleasure, we encounter the same thing again as the philosophy of 
life of worldly people in the eighteenth century. In satisfying his an-
imal nature, there is one situation in which man is most dependent 
on his environment: This is enjoyment of rank and honor. This view 
of the world is based everywhere on the same behavior: subordi-
nation of the will to the instinctual animal life that dominates the 
body and its relations to the external world. Thought, and the pur-
poseful activity based on it, are in the service of this animal nature; 
they are entirely devoted to seeking its satisfaction.
 This life- attitude finds its first expression in a considerable part 
of the literature of all peoples— sometimes as the unbroken power 
of animal nature, more often in the struggle with the religious 
world- view. Its battle cry is the emancipation of the flesh. The his-
torical, relative legitimacy of this reaction, a continuously- renewing 
and self- activating affirmation of the natural life, lies in this op-
position to the necessary but frightful disciplining of mankind by 
religion. When this life- attitude becomes a philosophy, the result is 
101
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
276 
V
naturalism. It asserts in theory how life is to be conceived, namely, 
that only the processes of nature are actual; that apart from na-
ture nothing exists; that spiritual life is only formally distinct from 
physical nature in terms of our consciousness of its properties, and 
that this empty determinacy of consciousness proceeds from what is 
physically actual in accordance with natural causality. The structure 
of naturalism is the same from Democritus to Hobbes, and from 
Hobbes to The System of Nature [of Baron d’Holbach], its episte-
mology is sensualism, its metaphysics is materialism, and its prac-
tical attitude is two- fold— a will for pleasure and a reconciliation 
with the overwhelming and alien course of the world by submitting 
to it in one’s way of thinking.
The philosophical justification of naturalism lies in two basic 
properties of the physical world, namely, the overwhelming extent 
and force of the physical contents that are actually given in our ex-
perience. Like something immeasurable and continuously expand-
ing, these contents encompass the meager spiritual phenomena that 
from this point of view seem to be mere interpolations in the great 
text of the physical order. Hence natural types, when they give the-
oretical consideration to such relationships, must find themselves 
entirely subject to this physical order. And nature is also the original 
locus of all cognition of uniformities. The experiences of daily life 
teach us to establish these uniformities and to reckon with them; 
and the positive sciences of the physical world, by studying these 
uniformities, acquire the cognition of the lawful system of nature. 
In this way they actualize an ideal of cognition that is unattainable 
by the human sciences, which are based on lived experience and 
understanding.
But the difficulties inherent in this point of view impel natural-
ism, in an endless dialectic, to constantly reconsider its position with 
respect to the world and to life. Matter, which is the starting point 
of naturalism, is a phenomenon of consciousness; thus naturalism 
falls into a vicious circle if it tries to derive consciousness itself from 
what exists only as a phenomenon for consciousness. Furthermore, 
it is impossible to derive sensation, feeling, and thought from move-
ment, which is given to consciousness only as a phenomenon. 
The incommensurability of these two basic facts (in the most vari-
ous attempts from ancient materialism to the Systema Naturae,4 the 
problem has proved to be insoluble) has now led to the positivistic 
correlation of the physical and the spiritual. But this too is subject 
4 Carolus Linnaeus, Systema Naturae, first edition published in 1735.
102
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
277
to grave misgivings. And finally, the morality of original naturalism 
is insufficient to make the development of society comprehensible.
2.
I will begin with the epistemology of naturalism and its basis in 
sensualism. By sensualism, I mean the derivation of both the cog-
nitive process and its achievements from external sense- experience, 
and the reduction of evaluative and purposive determinations to 
the standards of sensual pleasure and displeasure. Thus sensual-
ism is the direct philosophical expression of the naturalistic psy-
chic attitude. Hence we encounter here the genesis of the psycho-
genetic problem of naturalism, which is to derive the unity of the 
psychic life as a unitas compositionis5 from particular impressions. 
Sensualists do not deny the fact of inner experience or the ability 
of thought to connect what is given, but they find in the physical 
order the foundation for our cognition of the lawful connectedness 
of what is actual. The properties of thought are considered to be 
either self- evident or can be theoretically reduced to an aspect of 
sense- experience.
The first theory of sensualism was formulated by Protagoras. The 
universal power of reason at work in human thought had not yet 
been separated in earlier metaphysics from the physical properties 
of human beings— from the process of breathing and from sense- 
images that impinge on the body. Protagoras taught that perception 
arises in the cooperation of two kinds of motion, one that is exter-
nal and one that is organic and occurs within us. And since for him 
perception and thought are not separate, he derived all of psychic 
life from the perceptions that arise in this way. He also explained 
pleasure, displeasure, and impulses by means of the cooperation of 
these two motions. Hence he was certainly a sensualist, and he was 
already aware of the phenomenalistic and relativistic consequences 
of this point of view. Protagoras’ theory of relativity considers all 
cognitive and value assessments and the setting of purposes to be 
determined solely by what is empirical in the human organism; 
hence it excludes any possibility of comparing these functions with 
the external processes to which they relate. Thus cognition, value, 
and purpose have only relative validity, insofar as they correlate 
with this human organism. The subject is no longer linked with its 
object by the supposition of a universally identical reason, which 
5 A compositional or compound unity is not an inherent unity.
103
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
278 
V
is at work in the universe and recognizes what is identical as iden-
tical. Sensory organization shows the most various forms in the 
animal realm as it reaches up to human life; the world must be quite 
different for each of these forms. The merely empirical facticity of 
[our] sensory organization, the dependence of all thought on this 
empirical facticity and on how this organization is integrated into 
the physical order form the foundation of all doctrines of relativity 
in the ancient world.
Given such presuppositions, how are experience, or a science of 
experience, possible? That was the next problem. Mathematics, as-
tronomy, geography, and biology were growing steadily, and sen-
sualistic skepticism had to make their possibility comprehensible. 
Carneades’6 doctrine of probability contained in itself the tendency 
to set up a positivistic equilibrium between sensualistic presupposi-
tions and the empirical sciences. In his type of skepticism, the validity 
of cognition is based not on the Greek conception of an imitative 
relation between representations and external objects, but on the 
inner agreement of perceptions both among themselves and with 
concepts, forming a coherent whole free of contradictions. In the 
ideal of a “highest attainable probability,” and in distinguishing 
the steps leading to this ideal, a standpoint was gained from which 
metaphysics could be attacked and empirical knowledge could be 
assured a modest measure of validity.
But only when the great epoch of the foundation of the math-
ematical natural sciences in the seventeenth century recognized an 
order in nature that was based on laws, did sensualism enter its 
last decisive period. Natural science had established itself as unas-
sailable empirical knowledge, and sensualism had to recognize this 
fact, take a position with respect to it, and somehow overcome its 
skeptical conclusions of former times. This was the great accom-
plishment of David Hume. He himself saw his philosophy as the 
continuation of the Skepticism of the Academy; and in fact, the 
main features of this skepticism do recur in his philosophy. [These 
include] the mere facticity of our sensory organization and of the 
thought associated with it. Consequently, any imitative relationship 
between the perceiving mind and the objective world is eliminated, 
which means that our cognition of the world is deflected into a 
merely internal agreement of perceptions among themselves and 
with concepts. Through his analysis, these theses attain the most 
6 Carneades (214/3– 129/8 BC), Greek philosopher and Academic Skeptic.
104
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
279
fruitful development. Regular sequences of events make us accus-
tomed to determinate associations. This inherent associative power 
is the only basis for the concepts of substance and causality. The 
resulting conclusions were to become the foundation of positivism. 
The empirical coherence of the world brought about by the rela-
tions of substance and causality, becomes a secondary effect of the 
animal facts of custom and association. Empirical science is limited 
to uniformities of coexistence and the succession of phenomena so 
that any knowledge of inner relations, essence, substance, and cau-
sality is excluded. And these uniformities constitute the object of 
our knowledge of spiritual as well as physical facts. All parts of the 
world are brought together in one kind of lawfulness.
At its core David Hume’s system is still sensualistic, but these 
important results came to be freed from their metaphysical presup-
positions starting with d’Alembert’s positivistic epistemology. Posi-
tivism became a method, and in opposition to the phenomenalistic 
standpoint, the naturalism of Feuerbach, Moleschott,7 and Büch-
ner8 affirmed the “crystal clarity of the sensible.” And Comte’s nat-
uralism already validated the systematic coherence of physical facts 
among themselves and the dependence of psychical facts on them as 
taught by the new physiology of the brain.
3.
The metaphysics of naturalism received its mechanistic foundation 
in the era after Protagoras. Mechanistic explanation is in and for 
itself a positive- scientific procedure and is accordingly compatible 
with various world- views. Mechanistic metaphysics comes into be-
ing only when what is actual is treated as nothing but a mechanism, 
when concepts that are only procedural aids are treated as entities. 
The causes of motion are found in the particular material elements 
of the universe, and spiritual facts are, by some method or other, 
attributed to these elements. All the inwardness that religion, myth, 
and poetry had ascribed to nature is removed; nature has now lost 
its soul, and no uniform coherence sets bounds on its technical in-
terpretation. It is this standpoint that first gives naturalism a strictly 
scientific form. Its problem now is to give a lawful derivation of 
7 Jacob Moleschott (1822– 1893), Dutch physiologist and materialist.
8 Friedrich Karl Christian Ludwig Büchner (1824– 1899), German philosopher, 
physiologist and leading exponent of scientific materialism.
105
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
280 
V
the spiritual world from the mechanical arrangement of physical 
constituents.
An immense literature resulted from attempts to solve this prob-
lem. Its high points include the Epicurean system and its brilliant 
presentation by Lucretius as well as the melancholy, powerful sys-
tem of Hobbes that consistently conceived the entire spiritual world 
from the point of view of the urge to live as it becomes the source 
of the struggle for power in individuals, classes, and states. Then in 
eighteenth- century France, we take note of the Systema Naturae, 
which expresses in its lifeless formulas the secret of the most unbe-
lieving and pleasure- seeking era of all time, and more recently the 
fanatical materialistic doctrine of Feuerbach, Büchner, Moleschott, 
and their like.
The power of these theories lay in the fact that they were built 
on the foundation of an external, spatial, palpable reality that is 
accessible to exact natural- scientific thought. Not the slightest trace 
of incomprehensible forces remained in them. Nowhere was there 
a corner where anything independently spiritual or transcendent 
could hide. Everything was rational and natural. The impetus of 
this materialistic metaphysics was the struggle against the obscure 
forces of religion and spiritualistic metaphysics. Its historical justi-
fication was to abolish the alliance that existed in society between 
the Church and despotic powers.
In this order of things, there is no room for consideration of the 
world from the standpoint of value or purpose. Value and purpose 
are blindly generated products of the course of nature; they are of 
special interest to us only because our inner life makes us the center 
of the world and measures everything according to our own feel-
ings, aspirations, and goals.
4.
Because naturalism has a twofold relation to the course of nature, 
its ideal of life also had to be twofold. Through passion, humans are 
slaves of the course of nature— cunning, calculating slaves; and yet 
through the power of thought, they stand above it.
 Even in antiquity, both sides of the naturalistic ideal were de-
veloped. The sensualism of Protagoras contained the conditions 
for the hedonism of Aristippus.9 For according to him, not only 
9 Aristippus of Cyrene (c. 435— c. 356 BCE), a pupil of Socrates, who adopted 
the quite different outlook that the goal of life was to seek pleasure.
106
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
281
sense- perceptions, but also sensible feelings and desires have their 
origin in the contacts between our sensible organization and the 
external world; and these cannot express the objective values that 
are contained in what is actual, but only the relation of the life of 
the feelings of the subject to these objective values. Aristippus con-
cluded from this that the standard and goal of right action could be 
found exclusively in the pleasure that matches the optimal motion 
occurring in our sensory organism. The content- based standard and 
goal of the art of living is to be sought in the physical connection 
between our animality and external nature, as revealed in sensible 
motions. The Socratic reflective attitude now becomes a sovereign 
play of formal thought that calculates pleasure values and flouts 
conventions and the objective orders of life. But in visual perception 
and aesthetic enjoyment, which played such a great role in ancient 
Greece, there was another ideal, and this too lay within the range 
of the sort of naturalistic metaphysics represented by Democritus, 
Epicurus, and Lucretius. The experiences stemming from the urge 
to live well led toward an ideal of tranquility that is achieved by one 
who identifies with the steadfast, lasting coherence of the universe. 
This psychic attitude found its expression in the didactic poem of 
Lucretius. He experienced in himself the liberating power of the 
great cosmic, astronomical, and geographical world- perspective 
that Greek science had created. His conception of an immeasur-
able universe with eternal laws [that govern] the genesis of world- 
systems, the history of the earth as it becomes covered with plants 
and animals, and finally brings forth human beings, allowed him 
to consider himself far superior to the political intrigues and the 
wretched puppet deities of his people. Indeed, from this cosmic per-
spective, individual life, with its thirst for enjoyment and power, 
and the struggle of individuals in the Roman world theater, shrank 
to insignificance. [“Lucretius was the first to express the peace of 
mind that derives from the consciousness of being a fleeting mani-
festation of the immeasurable cosmos.]10
Already in antiquity the experience of those who demanded sen-
sual happiness in this world had loosened the grip of the doctrine 
that sense- pleasure was the goal of life. Enduring spiritual pleasure 
came to be considered as important as sensuous pleasure, and the 
Epicurean school undertook to solve the problem of deriving cul-
ture, in its richness and greatness, from the elements of sensuous 
10 Dilthey, “Der Grundriss der allgemeinen Geschichte der Philosophie,” Gesam-
melte Schriften, XXIII, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2000, 59.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
282 
V
feelings of pleasure and displeasure, by assuming progress in human 
development. But it was not until modern times that scientifically 
valid means for the naturalistic explanation of spiritual develop-
ment became available. These means included the understanding of 
our spiritual life on the basis of our milieu, the derivation of eco-
nomic life from the interests of the individual, and of higher culture 
from economic progress. Moreover, the theory of evolution tried to 
account for the intellectual and moral properties of human beings as 
the result of minimal changes over immeasurable stretches of time. 
The naturalistic ideal of the free man, who recognizes that God, 
immortality, and the invisible order of things are only phantoms of 
his own wishful thinking, was proclaimed by Ludwig Feuerbach on 
the basis of a long cultural development. This ideal had a powerful 
influence on political ideas, literature, and poetry.
4. The Idealism of Freedom
Again, I proceed from the fact that there are a great many systems 
that are based on a life- attitude or stance on the world that re-
solves the problems involved in the riddle of life in a definite di-
rection. These systems, taken together, constitute a second type of 
world- view.
1.
The idealism of freedom is the creation of the Athenian spirit. In 
Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, the sovereign, forma-
tive, and shaping energy of this idealism becomes the principle by 
which the world is understood. Cicero expressly stated his agree-
ment and feeling of kinship with Socrates and everything Socratic 
in later Greek philosophy. And prominent Christian apologists and 
Church fathers find themselves in conscious agreement with both 
the Socratic spirit and Roman philosophy. The Scottish School, 
furthermore, rests entirely upon Cicero’s way of thinking, and is 
at the same time aware of how much it has in common with those 
older Christian writers. And the same consciousness of affinity re-
lates Kant and Jacobi, as well as Maine de Biran and related French 
philosophers up to Bergson, back to these earlier writers.
 This awareness of a kinship among the representatives of this 
way of thinking is accompanied by sharp polemics against the nat-
uralistic system. All of these thinkers, but especially the most pro-
found ones, are permeated through and through with the awareness 
107
108
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
283
of being totally different from the naturalists in their conception 
of life, world- view, and ideal. But also the opposition to panthe-
ism was made increasingly evident by the representatives of this 
idealism of personality. When the pantheism of ancient Greece split 
off from the religious personification of, and personal communion 
with, the gods, Socrates declared himself against this pantheism as 
well, and the prevailing tendency of Roman philosophy was to em-
phasize its kinship with Socrates. Early Christian philosophy was 
in conscious agreement with the representatives of the idealism of 
freedom and of personality, in opposition to both naturalism and 
pantheism. And the same position was taken in the struggle of later 
Christian philosophy against the objective idealism of Averroes. 
This opposition again asserts itself in the Renaissance in the strug-
gle of Giordano Bruno against any kind of Christian philosophy, 
and the battle of Christian philosophy against the new pantheism 
of Bruno. From that time on, this position continues in the opposi-
tion between Spinoza and any doctrine of personality or freedom, 
between Leibniz and many defenders of freedom, and finally in the 
disputes between Kant, Fichte, Jacobi, Fries11 and Herbart12 on the 
one hand, and Schelling, Hegel, and Schleiermacher on the other. 
All the great philosophical battles of recent centuries have derived 
their passionate character from how the various world- views stand 
over against the oppositions radiating from this problem. Bayle’s 
struggle against Spinoza had as its root the need for more free-
dom from determinism. Voltaire’s battle against Leibniz pitted a 
practical, humane attitude position that sought to uphold freedom 
against a contemplative metaphysics based on an intuition of the 
universe. Then Rousseau, with enormous success, proposed a phi-
losophy of personality and freedom, in opposition to any form of 
naturalism or monism. The discussion between Jacobi and Schelling 
is concerned with the main problems that exist between objective 
idealism and the philosophy of personality, and no more passionate 
controversy than this had ever occurred before. In the same way, 
Herbart’s polemic against monistic philosophy derived its vehe-
mence from his feeling that the great truths of the theistic system 
were called into question by this monism, which at the same time 
claimed to be defending the Christian world- perspective, which is 
11 Jakob Friedrich Fries (1773– 1843), a German philosopher in the Kantian 
tradition, who argued that we can have a presentiment of the divine.
12 Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776– 1841), a German philosopher and founder 
of pedagogy.
109
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
284 
V
theistic at root bottom. And the bitterness with which Fries and 
Apelt13 attacked monistic speculation is likewise attributable to the 
hatred directed both against Schelling’s and Hegel’s distortion of 
the empirical natural sciences and against the dissolution of Chris-
tian theism under the cover of defending Christianity.
2.
This consciousness of belonging together and of opposition that links 
the representatives of the idealism of freedom among each other and 
separates them from objective idealism and from naturalism, cor-
responds to the actual relations among the various systems of this 
type. Specifically, the bond that links the world- view, method, and 
metaphysics of the systems [of the idealism of freedom] is an attitude 
that confronts all givens with sovereign self- sufficiency and contains 
within itself the independence of the spiritual from all these givens. 
Here spirit knows its essence to be distinct from all physical causal-
ity. With a deep ethical insight, Fichte saw the connection between 
the personal character of a group of thinkers and the idealism of 
freedom in opposition to every natural system. This free autonomy 
then finds that it is also bound in a relationship to other persons, not 
physically, but by means of an ethical norm and duty. This generates 
the concept of a realm of persons, in which individuals are bound 
in accordance with norms, but are nevertheless internally free. A 
further consequence of these premises is that the relation between 
free, responsible individuals, bound internally by law, and a realm 
of persons is linked to an absolute personal and free cause. The life- 
attitude of the idealism of freedom regards its spontaneous and free 
vitality as a force that determines other persons in their freedom, 
and at the same time it experiences that other persons can become a 
force by which its own spontaneity is correspondingly determined. 
Thus this vital volitional way of determining and being- determined 
becomes not only a schema for world- order in general, but is also 
projected into the world- nexus itself; it is then rediscovered in every 
relationship, even the most comprehensive, in which the subject of 
systematic thought finds itself. And thus the divine is removed from 
the nexus of physical causality and is comprehended as governing it 
from without— a projection of purpose- giving reason that is sover-
eign and independent of all givens. This concept of divinity was phil-
osophically determined and precisely expressed by Anaxagoras and 
13 Ernst Friedrich Apelt (1812– 1859), a student of Fries.
110
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
285
Aristotle in terms of the relation between divinity and matter. The 
idea of a personal God finds its most radical metaphysical expres-
sion in the Christian idea of creation ex nihilo, from the nonexistent. 
It expresses God’s transcendence over against the law of causality 
that governs the natural world according to the rule that “ex nihilo 
nihil fit.” And in Kant, God’s transcendence is critically justified in 
that our cognition of the world connects its truths according to the 
principle of sufficient reason: God is only there for the will who de-
mands his existence by force of its freedom.
3.
Thus arises the structure that is common to all systems in this type of 
world- view. As soon as this type [of the idealism of freedom] becomes 
aware of its presuppositions concerning philosophical method, it 
will base its epistemology on facts of consciousness. In metaphysics 
this world- view manifests various forms. It first occurs in Attic phi-
losophy as a conception of formative reason that shapes matter into 
a world. The great discovery of conceptual thought and moral will 
and their connection with a spiritual order that is independent of the 
natural order of things derives from Plato and remains fundamental 
in Aristotle. The Roman concept of the will and the Roman view of 
an authoritative relation of God to the world prepared the way for 
replacing the conception [of a formative reason] with the creation 
theory of Christianity. It was to erect a transcendent world on the 
basis of relations experienced in the volitional attitude. The concepts 
about God that are distinctive of Christian consciousness include 
that of the relation of a father to his children, communion with God, 
providence as the symbol of an authoritative power over the world 
that is just and merciful. It was a long way from there to the highest 
purification of this consciousness of the divine in German transcen-
dental philosophy. The austere heroic grandeur of the idealism of 
freedom, seen at its most perfect in Schiller, forms a supersensible 
world that exists for the will only because it is posited from the point 
of view of the will’s ideal of endless striving.
 4.
This world- view possesses its universally valid foundation in the 
facts of consciousness. As the metaphysical consciousness of heroic 
humanity, it is indestructible; it renews itself in everyone who per-
forms great deeds.
111
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
286 
V
But it is unable to define or ground its principle with the univer-
sal validity expected of the sciences. Thus a restless dialectic starts 
to work again here, moving forward from possibility to possibility, 
yet incapable of reaching a solution to its problem. The productive 
will that functions purposively in family, law, and state, was devel-
oped by Roman thought into life- concepts that were then attributed 
to innate natural predispositions for the conduct of life. Hence the 
reliability of its mode of life- conduct was based on something in-
accessible and unprovable. In a circular argument, the regularity of 
norms of life was based on nativistic presuppositions that in turn 
could be justified only on the basis of norms agreed to by the peo-
ple of many nations. That was how the Roman philosophy of life 
established its idealism of personality. Then Christian consciousness 
developed this into the principle of the transcendence of spirit and 
its independence of all natural orders. But this is only a symbolic 
expression for the experiences of the will in sacrificing itself as it sur-
passes the natural nexus of motivation by renouncing life for the 
power to bring about a supersensible order. The ideal of holiness 
finds its own confirmation, but it cannot be elevated into any for-
mula of logical consciousness. Kant and transcendental philosophy 
then undertook to define this ideal will and to establish it as univer-
sally valid. Something unconditional was validated as the highest 
norm and value, set apart from the course of the world. The attempt 
ended in failure. But it was renewed in the French idealism of per-
sonality from Maine de Biran to Bergson, in the idealistic form of 
pragmatism manifested in James and related thinkers, and in later 
German currents of transcendental philosophy. Its power is inde-
structible; only its forms and demonstrations change. This power 
is rooted in a life- attitude that proceeds from human agency and 
demands a reliable norm for establishing goals.
Schiller is the poet of this idealism of freedom, as Carlyle is its 
prophet and historian:
Great Alcides erst in endless strife
Trod the weary path of life,
Humbled e’en the coward’s slave to be— 
Hugged the lion, and the hydra fought;
Into Charon’s bark, he dreading nought,
Plunged alive, that he his friend might free.
All the heavy loads that earth brings forth,
On the shoulders of the hated one,
By the Goddess are heap’d up in wrath,
112
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
287
Till at length his race is run.
Till the god soars hence like some bright flame,
Casting off his earthly frame,
And the aether’s balmy incense drinks.
In his new unwonted pinions glad,
Upward flies he, and the vision sad
Life has fashion’d, sinks, and sinks, and sinks.14
5. Objective Idealism
Beyond the systems of the two types described above there is an-
other coherent and broad set that forms the bulk of all metaphys-
ics and extends throughout the whole history of philosophy. Their 
close connection with similar great phenomena of faith and art point 
to a world- view that permeates religions, artistic visions, and meta-
physical thought.
1.
I will first determine the extent to which this type appears within 
metaphysics. The majority of philosophical systems cannot be 
classed with either naturalism or the idealism of freedom. We find 
these systems in Xenophon, Heraclitus, and Parmenides, and every-
thing associated with them, in Stoicism, in Giordano Bruno, Spi-
noza, Shaftesbury, Herder, Goethe, Schelling, Hegel, Schopenhauer, 
and Schleiermacher. All these systems show pronounced traits of a 
common type, and this type is entirely different from the two others 
we have presented.
They are bound together by relations of dependence and by the 
most definite consciousness of kinship. The Stoics were quite aware 
of their dependence on Heraclitus; Giordano Bruno made extensive 
use of basic Stoic ideas; Spinoza is influenced by them and by the 
philosophical thinkers inspired by Giordano Bruno. But in contrast 
to the austere monism of Spinoza, Leibniz was able to give the great 
Renaissance view of consciousness its most perfect expression. Af-
ter the dissolution of substantial forms in the Renaissance, there is 
no longer any reality standing between divine order and individual 
things. The world is simply the explication of God, who has unfolded 
Himself in the world in a boundless manifoldness. Every individual 
14 From “The Ideal and Life,” in The Poems of Schiller, trans. Edgar Alfred 
Bowring (Charleston, SC: BiblioBazaar, 2009), 199.
113
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
288 
V
thing mirrors the entire universe from its own place, which is also 
Leibniz’s perspective. Although his dependence on the conceptual 
stock of his time led him to conceive of God as an individual and 
although he placed theology too much in the foreground, panen-
theism remains his fundamental insight. To conceive the universe 
as a single whole in which each part is determined by the ideal 
meaning nexus of the whole: That is the great new thought of Leib-
niz’s system. It is wholly defined by the question of the sense and 
meaning of the world. His closest spiritual ally is Shaftesbury, who 
was influenced by both the Stoics and Giordano Bruno. Moreover, 
the great objective idealists of Germany live in Leibniz’s sphere of 
influence, and they are influenced by Shaftesbury by means of the 
German poetic movement, especially through Goethe and Herder. 
The dependence of the objective idealists on Spinoza, partly di-
rect and partly through the preceding literary movement, has 
been demonstrated, and can be shown to be even more extensive. 
Thus, these systems constitute an historical complex that is just 
as closely interconnected as that of naturalism or the idealism of 
freedom.
Furthermore, they have always declared most decisively their 
opposition to the two other types of world- view. How harshly 
Heraclitus condemns the materialism of the common people! How 
sharply the Stoics contrast themselves to Epicurean sensualism! 
Yet at the same time, by renewing hylozoism, objective idealists 
are conscious of their separation from Plato and Aristotle. Gior-
dano Bruno carried on the struggle against any form of Christian 
world- view or Christian life- ideal with unprecedented passion. The 
same passion erupts in the free- style addenda that are an outpour-
ing of Spinoza’s life- mood, probably originally composed sepa-
rately and then inserted into his chains of argument. Schelling and 
Hegel directed manifestos and pamphlets against the idealism of 
freedom, especially against Kant, Fichte, and Jacobi as philosophers 
of reflection. And despite Schopenhauer’s criticisms of it, Schleier-
macher’s Kritik der Sittenlehre is basically nothing but one great 
polemic against the ethics of sensualism and against the dualistic, 
delimiting form of ethics of Kant and Fichte, on behalf of objective 
idealism.
If we follow up these indications using a comparative procedure, 
we recognize the kinship among the members of this group. We see 
also a structure common to all of them, by virtue of which they 
are united into one type of world- view. The system of principles that 
defines the structure of this type comprises an epistemological and 
114
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
289
methodological perspective, a metaphysical formula that encom-
passes various possibilities for the formation of metaphysical sys-
tems, as well as a principle for the shaping of life.
2.
In the first of the three world- views, the epistemological and meth-
odological position of consciousness with respect to the riddle of 
the world was the advance from the cognition of uniformities in 
the physical world to generalizations that made it possible to also 
subordinate spiritual facts to this external mechanistic lawfulness. 
The idealism of freedom, on the other hand, discovered the firm 
basis for a universally- valid solution to the riddle of the world in 
the facts of consciousness. It demanded the existence and possibility 
of establishing irreducible universal determinations of conscious-
ness that can spontaneously shape life and produce the structure of 
a world- view from the material of external reality. The epistemo-
logical and methodological approach of the third type is entirely 
different from both of them. This can be seen just as clearly in Her-
aclitus as in the Stoics, in Giordano Bruno as in Spinoza, and in 
Shaftesbury, Schelling, Hegel, Schopenhauer, and Schleiermacher, 
for it is based on the life- attitude of these thinkers. We call an atti-
tude contemplative, meditative, aesthetic, or artistic when its sub-
ject suspends the work of scientific cognition and practical action 
concerning our needs, the purposes arising from those needs, and 
the external actualization of those purposes. In this contemplative 
attitude, the life of our feelings, whereby we personally experience 
the richness of life and the value and joy of existence, expands to a 
sort of universal sympathy. By means of this expansion we enliven 
the entire actual world with the values that we feel, and the highest 
ideas of beauty, goodness, and truth are related to the way we act 
and live. The moods evoked in us by what is actual, we rediscover 
out there. And as we expand our own life- feeling into a feeling of 
kinship with the whole world and experience our affinity with all 
the phenomena of what is actual, we find a similar increase in our 
enjoyment of life and the consciousness of our own power. That is 
the psychic disposition by which individuals feel themselves at one 
with the divine coherence of things and akin to every other member 
of it. No one has expressed this disposition more beautifully than 
Goethe. He praises the spiritual bliss of “feeling and enjoying” nature: 
“Not cold amazement of a mere visit you granted me, but penetrat-
ing into nature’s heart, as into a close friend’s. You lead the hosts 
115
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
290 
V
of all that is alive before my eyes, teach me to know my brothers in 
quiet bushes and in air and water.”15
This state of mind finds that all the dissonances of life are re-
solved in a universal harmony of all things. The tragic feeling of the 
contradictions of existence, the mood of pessimism, and the humor 
that realistically grasps the limiting and confining narrowness of 
appearances are only steps that lead upward to the awareness of a 
universal existential and normative nexus. At bottom, it finds ideal-
ity to be victorious in what is actual.
The form of apprehension is everywhere the same in this objec-
tive idealism: not a collation of individual cases to reveal similarity 
or uniformity, but rather a simultaneous viewing of all the parts to 
perceive the whole. It expands the coherence of our life to that of 
the entire world.
Heraclitus was, as far as we know, the first thinker of this type 
to reflect about his philosophical procedure. His profundity lay in 
raising contemplative behavior to consciousness and expressing its 
opposition to the personifying thought of faith and of sense percep-
tion, whose isolating manner he considered of little value, as well 
as to the mere scientific observation of the world. The philosopher 
reflects on what surrounds him closely, continually, from day to day, 
and on what he finds to be everywhere the same. To witness what 
happens to us, this describes quite ingeniously the deep reflective 
circumspection by which the phenomena of the everyday world, 
self- evident to most people, become for the true philosopher objects 
of wonder and worth pondering. By means of this contemplative 
attitude, Heraclitus grasped that the course of the world was every-
where the same: a constant flux and corruptibility of all things, 
and yet at every point an intelligible order. Thus the tragic feeling 
of time’s restless advance, in which the present always is at hand 
and no longer, resolves itself in the consciousness of the permanent 
regularity of the universe in the midst of time’s flight.
In the Stoics the same view prevails of the universe as a whole, to 
which individual things relate as parts, and in which they are held 
together by a uniform force. They gave up subordinating facts to 
the abstract conceptual unities of Plato and Aristotle, and in place 
of the logical relation of the particular to the universal, their system 
established the organic relation of a whole to its members. This is 
the form of contemplation that Kant conceived of as the immanent 
15 Goethe, Faust, Part I, lines 3221– 27, trans. Walter Kaufmann (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday & Company, 1961), 311.
116
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
291
teleology of the organic, and which, with deep insight, he related 
closely to the aesthetic form of contemplation.
And after the waning of the scholastic syllogistic world system 
that had used substantial forms to ground a transcendent world in 
the service of Christian theology, the same categories of world- view 
arose in the time of transition from medieval to modern times: the 
whole and its parts, the individuality of these parts down to the 
smallest detail. Already in Nicholas of Cusa we see the most refined 
aesthetic conception of the universe, according to which the indi-
vidual thing, as a contraction of the whole, mirrors the entire uni-
verse from its place. Spinoza is the main proponent of the doctrine 
of the One universe. Leibniz’s world- view also proceeded from this 
way of thinking, despite the way his concept of God is rooted in his 
monadology and in his theological tendency. The full epistemolog-
ical self- awareness of this contemplative attitude comes about in 
Schelling, Schopenhauer, and Schleiermacher. The intellectual intu-
ition of Schelling expresses one aspect of the attitude of objective 
idealism. The will- less, contemplative aesthetic attitude of Schopen-
hauer, in which the subject no longer investigates the relations of 
things to each other as guided by the principle of sufficient reason, 
but instead highlights what is essential in phenomena, expresses an-
other aspect. And finally, the religion of Schleiermacher’s Speeches16 
as a form of intuiting and feeling the universe, shows a further as-
pect of this world- view type.
3.
From this attitude there results a metaphysical formula common 
to this whole class of systems: namely, that all phenomena of the 
universe are two- sided. Seen from the side of outer perception, they 
are given as sensible objects, and as such they stand in physical con-
nection. But as apprehended from within, they bear within them-
selves a life- nexus that can be experienced in our own interior life. 
Thus this principle can also be expressed as the kinship of all parts 
of the universe with both a divine ground and with each other. It 
corresponds to the psychic disposition of a universal sympathy that 
experiences the presence of God everywhere in the spatial phenom-
ena of what is actual. This consciousness of affinity is the basic 
metaphysical feature common to the religions of the Indians, the 
Greeks, and the Germans; and from this common feature there 
16 Schleiermacher, On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers (1799).
117
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
292 
V
arises, in metaphysics, the immanence of all things as parts of a 
whole in a unified world- ground, and the immanence of all val-
ues in a meaning- context that constitutes the sense of the world. 
The contemplation and intuition of those who in their own life re- 
experience the life of the whole (no matter how they interpret their 
life), experience in the externally given phenomena an inner, vital, 
and divine coherence. As a rule this contemplative attitude of ob-
jective idealism produces a deterministic perspective. For here the 
particular finds itself determined by the whole and the nexus of 
phenomena is conceived as subject to inner determination, what-
ever other determinations may apply.
4.
Whatever else this formula of objective idealism might contain about 
the inherent disposition of the world- nexus is expressed merely 
symbolically in religion, poetry, and metaphysics. It is simply not 
cognizable. Metaphysics only singles out specific aspects from the 
life of the subject— the life- nexus of the person— and projects these 
aspects into the realm of the immeasurable as a world- coherence. 
This generates an ever- new restless dialectic that struggles forward 
from system to system until, after all possibilities have been ex-
hausted, the insolubility of the problem is recognized.
Is this world- foundation reason or will? If we define it as thought, 
then it needs a will in order for anything to happen. If we grasp it as 
will, it presupposes purpose- determining thought. Will and thought 
cannot be reduced to each other. The logical thought of the world- 
foundation ends here, and what remains of life can merely be mir-
rored in mysticism. If we conceive the world- foundation metaphori-
cally as a person, then we are confined by the limitations of concrete 
determinations. If one ascribes the idea of the infinite to it, then all 
determinations vanish, and here too all that remains is the unfath-
omable, the incomprehensible, the obscurity of mysticism. If the 
world- ground is conscious, then it falls under the opposition of sub-
ject and object. We cannot possibly conceive of an unconscious be-
ing as able to produce consciousness out of itself, since consciousness 
is something higher. Again, we stand before something incompre-
hensible. We cannot figure out how plurality can come into being 
from a world- unity, nor how the mutable can arise from the eternal; 
it is logically inconceivable. The relations of being and thinking, 
extension and thought, are not made more comprehensible by the 
magical word “identity.” Thus all these metaphysical systems leave 
118
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
World VIeWs In metaPHYsIcal sYstems (1911) 
293
us with only a general attitude or dispositional world- view that was 
given its supreme expression by Goethe:
What kind of god would give the world a thrust from 
without
and make everything spin around his finger?
More fitting would be to move the world from within
and imbue himself in nature and nature in himself.
So that what lives and weaves and exists in him
will never miss his power and his spirit.17
17 Goethe, “Prooemion,” third strophe, Gedicht- Zyklus “Gott und Welt.” 
Translated by James McMahon and Rudolf A. Makkreel for this volume.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
PART VI
THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION
(1911)
Translated by Stephen W. Ball and Rudolf A. Makkreel
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
As far as we can see back into the history of humanity, life is perme-
ated with streams of religious life. At countless points we see them 
burst forth— they merge; they flow irresistibly on through the ages, 
from the beginning of recorded history up to the way it envelops 
human beings today. No visual metaphor is capable of expressing 
the essence of this incessantly advancing stream of the enormous 
multiplicity of religious life. For only spirit retains what transpires 
in the course of centuries for our memory. It is preserved for spirit 
as a presence in remembrance while no longer actual in the present. 
This is how the results of life, the creations of human spirit, and 
the objectifications of history are summarized. The results of the 
religious past surround us— the buried temples and holy places of 
the most diverse nations, tombs, sacrificial symbols, images of gods, 
and all the tools of worship, religious music and painting, its litera-
ture and hymns, writings of prayers and edification. Religions have 
possessed great powers by virtue of which an immeasurable wealth 
of monuments has been left behind up to the present! And all these 
remains point us to development in the religious life of humanity. 
For what we call the development of religion in history derives from 
the fact that as religious life constantly changes in its flow from 
past to present, the past is nevertheless held fast in the midst of new 
creations. Religious development is a form of change that draws its 
law from the essence of spirit and its determinacy from its history.
This, then, is the material for religious research.
The power and idiosyncrasy of religion also had a [more general] 
impact with a longstanding history. Thus, the life of the senses and 
the sensuous conception of life were at all times in conflict with 
religion. Religion also became the object of reflection and was at-
tacked as the natural enemy of the intellect. But one begins to fully 
understand the fate of religion only from the conflict between the 
aspiration of the great religions of revelation and reconciliation to 
VI, 288
289
This essay was written just prior to Dilthey’s death and was first published in 1924 
in volume VI of the Gesammelte Schriften. Pagination in the margins refers to that 
volume.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
298 
VI
dominate the whole psyche, and the simultaneous advance of cul-
ture toward an articulation of independent domains of life: secular 
projects, art, poetry, science, philosophy. This is the gigantic conflict 
that forced religion to limit its control over our minds and aroused 
all of the independent powers in human beings and in society as 
weapons against it. This conflict demanded that opponents of reli-
gion as well as its adherents make religion the object of reflection. 
It became necessary to recapture and defend that unassailable inner 
power of religion— the soul, so to speak, that inhabits the religious 
body of worship, organization, and dogma.
I will explicate this in more detail. In a variety of disputes, religion 
had to come to terms with secular life, its expression in poetry and 
literature, and with the growth of science. The great forms of the life 
of human spirit stand in shifting relationships with each other. To a 
large extent art and poetry grow out of religion. But when they reach 
maturity, they follow their own law, and each attempts independently 
to express the essence of things for itself. Likewise, philosophy is in 
its origins variously connected with religious life. However, just as 
the sciences of nature emerge and find their law in the intellect as 
separated from the other powers of the psyche and as directed to the 
practice of life, so philosophy too enters a new aggregative state, as it 
were. It appropriates the claim of universally valid knowledge from 
the natural sciences; the sensory world- image makes way for that of 
astronomy; the inner world of feeling and of the will is objectified in 
values, goods, purposes, and norms. This striving toward a firm foun-
dation for solutions to the riddle of the world, however, [which is] 
intensified by the battle between philosophies, first finds its satisfac-
tion in logic, epistemology, and rational metaphysical systems. This 
launches a thoroughgoing and disciplined battle between secular life, 
art, literature, poetry, science, and philosophy, on the one hand, over 
against religion and its organization in religious communities, on the 
other. As these secular disciplines develop and mature, they assert 
themselves as independent historical forces and demand their own 
place in the life of nations. Their demand for recognition made it 
inevitable that they would fall into conflict with religion.
The joyful affirmation of the world based on the fullness of sen-
suous life, and this- worldly efforts to improve human existence, as 
well as the intellectual power of science and philosophy also con-
tained motives that negate the religious frame of mind insofar as 
it originated from a restrictive, dogmatic faith and the pressures 
exerted by a powerful clergy. And this negation uses the weapon of 
reason to dissolve the irrational and transcendent aspects of faith. 
290
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
299
It defends worldly joy, justifies the purposes of life in secular work, 
and turns against fear of God, against fear of punishments in the 
next world, as well as against the counter- purposive atonements 
of sacrifice, ceremonies, and sacraments. This conflict must appear 
whenever a nation advances to a differentiated culture with many 
spiritual accomplishments, and whenever this culture is supposed 
to coexist with a clergy belonging to powerful organizations. This is 
a common and general tension. Just as common is the victory of 
culture through the progress of science.
The full realization of enlightenment in the pre- Christian world 
was achieved only by the Greeks and Romans as far as we can tell. 
It was not until after early Christendom— first in the Muslim world 
and then in occidental Christianity from the seventeenth century 
on— that a broad, cohesive and consistently developing period of 
enlightenment occurred. During such a period, the forces of culture 
respond negatively to undermine religion. Thus, when intellect is at 
its strongest, there exists no objective, impartial religious research. 
An abstract, rational religion is placed over against positive reli-
gion. This abstract religion is a part of that natural system that the 
scientific intellect pits against tradition. This was the case in Greece, 
then in Rome, and again in Arabic culture. The very irrational pro-
fundity of religiosity, from which its powerful effects emerge, is ex-
cluded as illusory, as superstition, as a remnant of darker times.
The ancient world never got beyond this standpoint of an ab-
stract contrast, and thus it also did not attain more than profound 
presentiments of the true nature of religion. The more recent Eu-
ropean peoples were the first to turn to a coherent, methodic, uni-
versal inquiry into religiosity. And this study of religiosity and of 
Christianity was at first most closely connected with a developing 
religious spiritual concern with freedom.1
1 The German editor notes that initially the text continued here with the follow-
ing sentences:
I will attempt to describe this [developmental] context.
So far the conception of this history of Christianity has been consistently 
based on the fundamental assumption that the standard for the value and goal 
of Christian development lies in the original form of Christianity. The Cath-
olic Church attempted to relocate the principles of its system back into early 
Christianity; Protestantism conceived the accomplishment of the Reforma-
tion as a return to early Christianity; and even modern scientific theologians, 
from Lessing and Semler on, conceived their faith to be the culmination of 
a Reformationist tendency to represent an archetypal Christianity. Objective 
291
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
300 
VI
 The modern Enlightenment ran its course in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. In the various cultural nations, it had assumed 
a varied relation to Christian religiosity. Everywhere, however, it is 
based on the idea of the solidarity of nations, and on the progress 
that had been generated by the joint work of the natural sciences 
and their application. Everywhere scholars and the cultivated live 
with a consciousness of the sovereignty of the human spirit based 
on the power of the intellect to subject everything to inquiry, includ-
ing every societal condition and every tradition. And everywhere 
the standard for evaluating religiosity becomes its agreement with 
scientifically acquired truth and its effect on the conduct of life. 
Since Lessing and Kant, we have become accustomed to appraising 
religion according to the moral effects that it brings about. And 
despite its one- sidedness, this standard nevertheless contains a sig-
nificant core of lasting value.
research that penetrates the inner structure of the periods of Christianity and 
their coherence with the course of European culture, is ever more. . . . 
The religion of Jesus set itself apart from the Jewish mode of worship in 
terms of an inner relation of love, trust, and blissfulness in contemplating the 
Heavenly Father, and flowing from this, a community of love— independent 
from the state, from the synagogue, and from the vocational structures— 
which bound together the children of God as brothers. Therein lay the eternal 
religious posture toward the invisible. But the consciousness of his religious 
mission, which Jesus took so seriously, found its expression in the belief that 
he was the Messiah predicted by the prophets. As such, he expected that the 
messianic kingdom would descend from heaven. Confident of this, he moved 
to Jerusalem, suffered, and died. And the faith of his disciples developed in 
the suspense which the expectation of his second coming evoked. It was just 
this suspense that intensified the unworldly intimacy of the love in which they 
turned away from any relations to their compatriots, to the state or to the or-
ders of the world. There existed in Jesus a frame of mind, developed further in 
his community, which was totally different from the religious emotional life 
of a Francis of Assisi, of a Luther, Zwingli, Cromwell, Gustavus Adolphus, of 
the Quakers, the Pietists, the Unitarians, of Carlyle or Schleiermacher. The re-
ligious frame of mind of Jesus could neither endure at that time, nor recur in 
any of the great religions, despite their will to renew it. Thus, the great forces 
that had to contend with the disappearance of the expectation of the second 
coming, have merely been the means for transforming this frame of mind into 
a new one, which required frustration of the first. When the Catholic Church 
emerged, it produced, as its highest religious accomplishment, the new monk-
ish religiosity which, despite this striving to relive the life of Christ, had a new 
religious form. Obedience to the divine order to the point of renouncing the 
will, and asceticism, especially celibacy— these are new aspects. All of these 
are intense efforts to surrender personal autonomy. Also, the opposition of 
implicit faith and religious life. The Church as an organization. The religiosity 
of the Reformers, which . . . <Here these crossed- out sentences break off.>
291
292
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   300
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
301
In Protestant countries, yet another element is added. Here, one 
went back to the religion of Christ. Locke, Lessing, and Kant were 
leaders in this direction. They discovered in the religion of Christ an 
idealism of freedom and moral dignity that proceeded from the eth-
ical autonomy of persons and envisioned religion as their relation 
to a highest moral being. It could be regarded as the abstract and 
rational schema of the living relation of Jesus to God.
How could this standpoint of Enlightenment have understood 
the mysticism that lies at the heart of the religious relationship and 
penetrated its dark, irrational depth? Some kind of lived experience 
of oneness with God is always the basis of the universal religions 
that spring from the depths of the creative, religious person. Because 
the Enlightenment excluded or combated precisely this element, it 
inevitably proved itself unsuitable for religious research. It has de-
stroyed much in those who have absorbed the results of science, 
which can never again be restored. For this work of dissolution, the 
Enlightenment has created methods of critique and interpretation 
that have become the foundation for the study of religions. Only by 
these methods do we penetrate the fog of legend to reach histori-
cal reality. With its causal historical explanations, it has created a 
not yet fully adequate procedure for finding the connectedness of 
historical phenomena. It was incapable of grasping the meaning of 
religions and their prodigious course of development.
From the inner development of Christian religiosity, a movement 
emerged during the same seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that 
could first lead the research project of Enlightenment to its goal. Indi-
vidual forms of this movement are the Catholic mysticism of Port- 
Royal,2 the English and then the American sects, [and] German- 
Protestant Pietism. There is a commonality to these forms: an urge 
to personally experience the inner life of religion. This movement 
thus accomplished a shift in the relative value between religious 
experience and the effects that the church, the sacraments, and tra-
ditions have on the psyche. This shift corresponds to the enhanced 
consciousness of one’s personal worth. The final authority for reli-
gious truth is found not in the testimony of a text, but rather in lived 
experience; texts can merely direct us to such experiences. <This 
movement> was made necessary by the efforts of the Enlightenment 
to replace tradition and dogma. And the power of this process was 
intensified by the generally advancing method of experience. The 
great power of the church to induce faith through its creed, the 
2 Monastery near Versailles founded in 1204.
293
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
302 
VI
sacraments, the sermon— and not least, through the influence of 
the clergy— recedes behind a solitary psychic process and an unor-
ganized exchange of religious experiences. Intellectual cognition of 
religion is replaced by a process that occurs in the totality of psychic 
life and arises out of life itself.
The localities where these experiences arise and are exchanged 
are sects, pietistic circles, and Catholic lay communities.
Increasing reflection of humans about themselves, psychologi-
cal observation, the urge for experience, the growing independence 
of individuals who sought the law of their life in themselves— this 
was the environment that unremittingly influenced this religious 
movement. And this effect of cultural advancement also pressed to 
make the products of the religious movement the object of reflec-
tion and research. Pascal, Arnauld,3 Fénelon,4 Lavater,5 Hamann,6 
and Herder are the representatives of this direction, which proceeds 
from religious experience to research into religious spirit. The most 
consequential development of this kind of research founded on reli-
gious experience took place in England and America, where an im-
measurable quantity of material in the life of the sects accumulated. 
Here, the psychology of religion found its classical realization. The 
most important work in this kind is The Varieties of Religious Ex-
perience by the prominent American psychologist William James.7
 It was Pietism that shaped the early development of Johann Sa-
lomo Semler, the great founder of biblical criticism in Germany, and 
of Kant, the profound interpreter of Christianity. And the small sect 
3 Antoine Arnauld (1612– 1694), French Jansenist theologian, associated with 
Port- Royal, and known for his critique of Descartes.
4 François de Salignac Fénelon (1651– 1715), French bishop.
5 Johann Kaspar Lavater (1741– 1801), German- Swiss poet, physiognomist, 
theologian.
6 Johann Georg Hamann (1730– 1788), German Protestant critic of the Enlight-
enment.
7 I would like emphatically to call attention here to this work; the material ac-
cumulated there will be frequently referred to in what follows. It is presented in 
an excellent translation by Georg Wobbermin (Leipzig 1907). Admittedly, it was 
possible only because the entire modern literature in the history of religion— indeed, 
the progress of the religious movement itself— had preceded it. It is chiefly occupied, 
to be sure, with the experiences of the religious sects of England and America. Ger-
man readers will have much occasion to shake their heads when they find here an 
explanation of the religious process that stands in close relation to the spiritualism 
so popular in America. But much more frequently they will find their understanding 
of religious experience expanded by the psychological genius of James (D).
294
294
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
303
of Herrnhuter (Moravians)8 influenced by Pietism, gave us Fries,9 
Novalis, and Schleiermacher, who greatly advanced the understand-
ing of religiosity in the new sense of a retreat from dogma and 
organization, to religious experience itself. But these men left the 
Moravian religiosity of their youth behind them; only its aftereffect 
on their frame of mind, an orientation toward the experience of the 
invisible, stayed with them. Again, it was the combination of this 
orientation with the new culture and philosophy, as it had devel-
oped near the end of the eighteenth century, which evoked in them 
a new level of religiosity.
The most important element from the general culture that shaped 
them was German transcendental philosophy, as Kant, Fichte, and 
the young Schelling developed it. Fries did not go beyond Kant, 
while Novalis and Schleiermacher are primarily influenced by Fichte. 
Schleiermacher’s religious genius found its decisive expression in his 
Speeches on Religion.10 Then, as has recently come to light, he had 
considerable influence on Hegel in the religiosity and religious re-
search of his youth. Also, the religious Restoration [in Prussia] was 
shaped by the Romanticism of Friedrich Schlegel,11 and by Nova-
lis and Schleiermacher. Thus, a mighty stream of new religious life 
emerges from the linkage between the religiosity of Christian lived 
experience and transcendental philosophy. Carlyle and Emerson also 
link the religion of lived experience— to be sure, as it had developed 
in their native countries— with German transcendental philosophy.
I will attempt to expand on this new understanding of religiosity 
that emerges from this linkage.
Transcendental philosophy was the great philosophical move-
ment that developed in German culture from Leibniz on by at-
tending to the profundity of human spirit. This tendency unfolded 
with us, because we were cut off from participating in the great 
economic and political developments of the time; all our powers 
were turned inward. The active energy of the state of Frederick the 
Great had waned. Instead, poetry, science, and speculation occu-
pied its most gifted men. They were led to go back from the visible 
8 Herrnhut is a town in Saxony, Germany, where the Moravian religious sect 
was founded in 1722.
9 Jakob Friedrich Fries (1773– 1843), Pietistic Moravian follower of Kant.
10 This is how Dilthey refers to On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers, 
trans. Richard Crouter (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). The work is 
also commonly referred to simply as Speeches.
11 Karl Wilhelm Friedrich von Schlegel (1772– 1829).
295
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
304 
VI
manifestations of the spiritual world to conditions not directly 
given in consciousness. In literature, this tendency asserted itself 
as the will to grasp universal human traits in each event. Whereas 
Shakespeare celebrated the individuality of phenomena, Goethe’s 
Faust and Schiller’s Wallenstein attempted to capture in their heroes 
the power of what is universally human. Transcendental philoso-
phy developed on the basis of such attitudes. It proceeded from the 
problems of knowledge and of moral willing and discovered a uni-
versality that pervades all individuals. This universality is produc-
tive in every single human being. It is manifested in the fact of the 
universal validity of our thinking and in the fact that the moral law 
is binding on us all. And both facts are inwardly connected in the I 
according to Fichte by means of a nexus of actions that constitutes 
its unconscious profundity and determines its development. And no 
matter how this universally valid nexus may be conceived to mani-
fest itself in all individuals— as expression of the world order, or as 
universal spirit whose objectification is nature— this transcendental 
philosophy of Fichte and the younger Schelling opens up a connec-
tion to the divine coherence of things in the unconsciously lawful 
and ethically shaping energy of the I. The separation of the human 
soul from God, their merely conceptual relation in the Enlighten-
ment, is overcome. A new freedom of religiosity is achieved, and the 
path to an understanding of religiosity is opened up. Thus, the later 
Fichte, Schelling, Hülsen,12 Berger,13 and Hölderlin arrive at an in-
finite that reveals itself in everything finite and makes the intuitions 
of religion understandable. The lived experience of the I that feels 
itself as one with the infinite coherence of things, with universal 
spirit, with the soul of nature, emerged in the religious life of the 
period and its religious research. The mysticism that secretly guided 
Spinoza’s philosophical construction became understandable again.
This mysticism as expounded in Schleiermacher’s Speeches 
on  Religion is quite different from that of Saint Francis or of Eck-
hart! Theirs was most closely tied to the Christian tradition and 
discipline— a mysticism based on the rare experience of union with 
God. Schleiermacher’s mysticism is free and based on a higher and 
constant consciousness supported by a relation to the invisible con-
text of things— a consciousness that arises from the recurring effects 
12 August Ludwig Hülsen (1765– 1810), German philosopher, initially a fol-
lower of Fichte, later connected with Romanticism.
13 Johann Erich von Berger (1772– 1833), German astronomer and philosopher, 
influenced by German Idealism.
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
305
of this context on the psyche. Their mysticism deprecated earthly 
existence relative to the supersensible; Schleiermacher’s affirms and 
sanctifies life through this relation. A joyful affirmation of the world 
order, a holy joy, is therefore its basic feeling; it gives free reign to art, 
science, philosophy, and the ethical by acknowledging their distinc-
tive worth. Each of these spiritual stances toward the world is recog-
nized as an independent and self- contained spiritual whole. Each is 
independent of religion, as it is from them. Morality as such knows 
nothing of the moral world order; epistemology oversteps its bounds 
when it moves beyond finite individual subjects and their search for 
universal validity to a supra- individual subject. And natural science 
becomes impure and uncritical whenever it would infer the sense of 
the world from the totality of nature and its lawfulness, or project a 
world soul. Religion must have its own standpoint on the world, with 
its own legitimate source; otherwise it is an impure mixture, an un-
critical overstepping of boundaries by ethical or scientific conscious-
ness. There is a religious kind of lived experience that possesses a 
legitimate, independent, original, and ineradicable efficacy in psychic 
life, and this experience is the origin of all dogmas, ceremonies, and 
organizations of communal religious life. That was the great discov-
ery of Schleiermacher’s in the Speeches on Religion.
Probably the most profound insight of Schleiermacher’s univer-
sal intuition is that the religious lived experience contains in itself 
the basis for explaining the multiplicity of religions and the basis 
for justifying their legitimacy. Religion involves intuition and feel-
ing evoked by the effects of the universe on the individual subject. 
Just as our psyche is alerted by the senses to the impressions of 
particular things, so we experience the universe in the intuitions 
and feelings that emanate from its unity. Indeed, each such influence 
evokes the experience of a fusion of our individual existence with it. 
In this mystical unity of a finite human being with the infinite, we 
become aware of the reality of the latter. Because these influences 
are also infinite in their number and variety as are the attitudes of 
the individuals who receive these influences, religious lived expe-
riences reveal ever new features of the universe. It is impossible to 
unify them in one system. There is no universal religion, and there 
is no valid, objective system of religious theses or principles. Yet 
religious geniuses are able to feel an inner relation or connectedness 
of these religiously conceived features of the universe. It is this con-
nectedness in its overall individuality and in the free interrelation 
of its constituents that constitutes religion. Dogmatism is only a 
secondary product. And wherever religion appears, there is lived 
296
297
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
306 
VI
experience of the reality of the infinite, and each feature of the latter 
that is so experienced is religious truth.
Thus, the Schleiermacher of the Speeches is not a researcher of 
religion; he is not even to be classified as a theologian; he is the 
harbinger of a new religiosity.
In Schleiermacher’s Speeches, however, the energy of this new re-
ligiosity is linked with a tendency to reflect on the general essence 
of religion. These reflections are limited by the fact that [he allowed 
the religious] lived experience to be defined by the culture of his time 
and place and <in accordance with his> individual situation. Schleier-
macher experiences religion as it emerged in his genius relative to the 
impulses of his times, and as it was accessible to the highest existing 
cultural stratum. His work is a unique combination of prophetic ex-
perience and the power to make religion the object of disciplinary 
inquiry. For that reason, his study of religion did not stem from an ob-
jective understanding of objectified religions, but rather from religious 
productivity itself. Thus, it leads to depths of self- reflection on reli-
gious creation that have never been disclosed in that way to anyone. 
But the productivity of this self- reflection must also be historically, 
humanly, and individually delimited. And since it carries within itself 
the entire past of European piety to arrive at something distinctively 
new, it also embodies the power to gain a deeper understanding of 
what remains foreign to it, and to anticipate future forms of religious 
life. Its prophetic stature stands at a height of religious development 
from which one can survey the long path that has been traversed.
Schleiermacher came from the Moravian community of brothers, 
and as a boy in this sect that grew from Pietism, he experienced the 
personal religiosity and illuminations of his companions through an 
exchange of religious experiences. When he also lived through ratio-
nalism, its link to the invisible became a redeeming power for him, 
not a mere doctrine. He looked for this link in lived experience, not in 
conclusions or postulates, as did the Kantian school of his youth. But 
then he, too, was seized by the moral idealism of Kant and reshaped 
it with the idea that moral idealism works itself out in terms of an in-
finite evaluative manifold of individualities. And precisely herein lies 
what is most distinctive about his world- affirming, world- rejoicing, 
pantheistic mysticism, namely, that from the idea of humanity he 
found his way to a conception of the divine world- order. Humanity, 
with its abundance of individual configurations, as these are experi-
enced in action and understood in both conflict and love was for him 
the key to world spirit, the infinite, and divinity. Thus arose a new 
kind of faith that we then see at work in Novalis, in Carlyle, in Emer-
son, and in the Unitarians. It is a belief in a spiritual system operative 
298
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
307
in the universe: a radiant spiritual power that disperses itself into 
many modes of individual activity, a pantheism of world- affirmation 
that experiences the realization of an ideal as the divine in the world.
But this religiosity of Schleiermacher was for him only a single 
individual configuration in the moving stream of religious life. The 
more this religiosity was the expression of the formative history of 
his life, the less he claimed a universal validity for it. He saw an-
other new form of religion emerging from the intuition of nature of 
Novalis and the young Schelling. Like Lessing, he anticipated new 
revelations of religious spirituality. For him, religion is by its nature 
individual in form. Having started with his own lived experience, 
he looked there for the characteristics of the general nature of re-
ligion. In doing so, he proceeded intuitively rather than methodi-
cally. His demarcations are not always clear in the Speeches, but he 
probed religious life to discover new depths there. He assimilated 
new forms of religion which have expanded the concept of religion 
and the horizon of religious research.
Schleiermacher’s position in the history of religious research is 
unique because here is a genius who manifests the depths of reli-
gious lived experience through conscious, scientific self- reflection. 
This profundity also made possible a new understanding of the var-
ious objective religions. The central significance of Schleiermacher’s 
[lived sense of religiosity] is not as apparent as that of the scholarly 
interpreters of objective religion, because it invisibly pervades his 
religious research. But one need only recall that Hegel— the other 
thinker who along with Schleiermacher, went back to the depths 
of religious experience— received extraordinary stimulation from 
Schleiermacher’s Speeches. So did Novalis and Schlegel. Bauer,14 
Strauss,15 and Zeller,16 the founders of Biblical criticism and of the 
history of Christianity, were influenced by him just as they were by 
Hegel. This whole current of interpretations of religion then also 
flows on to the study of the other religions.
And Schleiermacher himself, as professor of theology, had be-
gun to work on Christianity systematically. He scrutinized the leg-
ends that surround the beginning and end of Christ’s life story. He 
14 Ferdinand Christian Bauer (1792– 1860), founder of the Tübingen school of 
biblical criticism and church historian.
15 David Friedrich Strauss (1808– 1874), liberal German theologian, whose Life 
of Jesus Critically Examined questioned his divinity.
16 Eduard Zeller (1814– 1908), German philosopher and theologian. His corre-
spondence with Dilthey can be found in Dilthey’s Briefwechsel, vols. 1 & 2 (Göttin-
gen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2011, 2015).
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
308 
VI
developed a theory of the methods of exegesis and critique and 
of their utilization for biblical writings. From him originated the 
conception— fundamental to the history of Christianity— of the 
inner structural link of religious lived experience to the rituals of 
worship and to the religious imagination that is operative in legends 
and myths as well as in dogma formation and church organization. 
The Speeches developed this structural nexus in its overall inner vi-
tality, although still subjectively conditioned by his own lived expe-
rience; his subsequent theological period raised this kind of insight 
to an ever- increasing objective level. He gave prominence to the 
mystical nature of the original religious lived experience. And then 
in the central work of his theological period, in his published Chris-
tian Faith17 and in the posthumously published theory of Christian 
ethics18— two studies that must be understood as an inner unity 
according to Schleiermacher— he employed the classification of re-
ligions to exhibit for the first time the inner structure of the overall 
Christian life- nexus for contemporary culture. It was he who first 
divined that the basic essence of Christianity lies in its affirmative, 
active character in supporting cultural life. Ritschl’s historical ap-
praisal of Protestantism is fully dependent on him in this regard.19 
This essence of Christianity was subsequently connected with the 
relation of Christians to the person of Christ as embodying the ideal 
of humanity and to his lived experience of the kingdom of God. Of 
the two perspectives of modern theology— the one that conceives of 
Christianity in terms of an historically conditioned relation to the 
person of Christ, the other that sees in Christ the symbol of eternal 
truth, of religious unity with God— Schleiermacher has fostered the 
acceptance of the former perspective in more recent theology. His 
youthful sense of a mystical relation to Christ attained an increas-
ing power over Schleiermacher in his later period as preacher and 
<teacher> of theology. His Christian Faith is merely the dogmatic 
expression of this second, central experience of his.20 Its power 
17 Schleiermacher, The Christian Faith (1821– 1822), trans. H. R. Mackintosh 
and J. S. Stewart (Edinburgh 1948; New York 1963).
18 See Schleiermacher’s lectures entitled Christliche Sittenlehre: Vorlesungen im 
Wintersemester 1826/27, ed. Hermann Peiter, Berlin: Lit Verlag, 2011. [und Das 
christliche Leben: nach den Grundsätzen der evangelischen Kirche im Zusammen-
hange dargestellt.]
19 Albrecht Ritschl (1822– 1889), German Lutheran theologian recognized for 
his attempts to relate Kantian ethical thought to Protestantism.
20 The first mystical relation was with the infinite universe.
299
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   308
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
309
 superseded the reflective attitude expected of inquiry. Also influ-
ential here was the impulse in the first decade of the nineteenth 
century to defend the religious life of Protestantism over against the 
Enlightenment. At the same time, in order to make clear the true 
limits of his formulations in the Christian Faith, one must consider 
that this work claims to be a representation of the communal con-
sciousness of Protestantism.
On all of these points, Schleiermacher’s theological period was a 
further development of the Speeches and Soliloquies21 of his youth. 
The changes in his viewpoint were also in large part influenced by 
deficiencies in the viewpoint of the Speeches. He had to overcome 
the way in which the ideals of religion in his time had been confused 
with the universal defining marks of religion. The universal nature 
of religion had to be worked out in a purer form. The temporally 
conditioned, complicated stance of religion toward morality had to 
give way to a simpler, more objective relation. The same was true for 
the way that Fichte had influenced his thinking about the relation of 
religion and philosophy. Schleiermacher also had to make room for 
his views on the person and role of Christ. But all of this did not oc-
cur without loss. He allowed contemporary advances of philosophy 
to carry him along. Accordingly, he thought he had found a way out 
of the difficulty of the Speeches in a metaphysics and ethics based 
on the identity of the real and the ideal. By correlating the Speeches 
with this system of identity, the feeling of the absoluteness of this 
identity was made foundational as an unfruitful abstraction of reli-
gion. Each particular form of religion, as an individual variation of 
the feeling of dependence, became a life- form that must accommo-
date itself to this metaphysical system. This created an indissoluble 
dualism between a metaphysical system as a rational whole whose 
character is to strive for universal validity and individual religious 
systems founded on the feeling of dependency. The accommodation 
of religious systems to one metaphysical system was their historical 
fate. Their forms were derived from a generic classification rather 
than from understanding and analysis. The profound idea of under-
standing Christianity by going back behind its dogmas to probe the 
determinacy of religious states of mind did not lead Schleiermacher 
to also see these states of mind as vital processes inherently rooted 
in life. Indeed, in his [systematic mode of] thinking everything be-
came a timeless schematism.
21 Soliloquies, trans. and ed. Horace Friess (Chicago: Open Court Publishing 
Co. , 1926).
300
125-80164_Dilthey_SelectedWorksVI_4P.indd   309
8/8/19   8:58 AM
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
310 
VI
Ritschl and his school started to think more historically, and his 
historical insight into the course of religious processes was more 
profoundly captured in concrete forms of Christian religiosity. He 
endeavored to understand the value of religious formations on the 
basis of actual historical conditions, and he cleared a wider path for 
theology along Neo- Kantian lines by rejecting any kind of rational 
metaphysical system. Although Ritschl gave the irrational character 
of religion more free rein, this remarkable intellect was neverthe-
less so narrowly confined that each of his fundamental conceptions, 
despite its genesis in history, could not do justice to history. The 
universal- historical perspective of Schleiermacher’s Speeches, which 
contained the germ of the coming general science of religion— was 
given up by Ritschl. Schleiermacher’s recognition of the importance 
of mysticism in religion was suppressed by Ritschl’s ahistorical ha-
tred of it. The importance of religious lived experience in the history 
of religious creativity was unintelligible for this sober mind. Even 
in focusing his studies on Christianity, he did not appreciate the 
role that lived experience played in the emergence of Christianity. 
The immediate conviction of Jesus that God is working within him 
is only conceivable as a mystical lived experience. Nor did Ritschl 
understand how the mysticism inherent in Christ’s lived experience, 
as in Paul’s visionary experience and the ecstasies of hermits, con-
verged with Neoplatonic asceticism and its visions and ecstasy. In 
pantheistic mysticism, in the religiosity of sects and in Pietism, he 
saw only a falsification of Christianity.
The religious lived experience includes a horizon beyond the sen-
sory nexus of things grasped by the intellect; the contents of this 
lived experience is inaccessible to the intellect and not representable 
in any concepts. In a state of passive devout acceptance a real effect 
on our present, conscious state of mind is experienced; and qua re-
ligious lived experience, this effect is interpreted as stemming from 
that invisible horizon.
The religious lived experience distinguishes itself from all similar 
states— from the effect of poisons [and drugs], from trances, from 
states that mark spiritualism— by two coexisting moments. The re-
ligious experience results from an inner sequence of psychic states 
that have their peak and culmination in a calmness that satisfies a 
soul suffering under the weight of the world. Secondly, the experi-
ence evokes a lasting transformation of psychic life. The coherence 
of these two moments manifests itself in the fact that the dissatisfac-
tion deriving from the above- mentioned inner succession of states 
already evokes in many cases the ease of giving up the values of 
worldly life, and a constancy of persisting in this task. Connected 
301
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
311
with this are a profusion of experiences about the worthlessness of 
worldly values, including the most refined reflection about them, as 
well as a fixation on the invisible world and a technique for cultivat-
ing this fixation that endows the religious experience with a fullness, 
duration, and efficacy.
The concatenation of these moments of the religious experience 
provides the starting point for the phenomenology of religion, as well 
as for the way Matthew Arnold, Schleiermacher, and Neander 22 
understood church history. Neander had to extract the moments 
of autobiography, religious retrospection, and meditation from the 
external course of church history— the same is true for the effects 
of religion on worship and custom. But he did not grasp what is 
specific about the forms of these practices, and he had just as lit-
tle sense of the inner relation of religion to its organization. This 
was the state of historical theology that Ritschl inherited; his cool, 
clearheaded mind, his genius for retrospective understanding could 
have led us far from here if the aforementioned narrowness of his 
personal religious experience and of his historical horizon had not 
hindered him.
Everything pressed toward a universal conception of the prob-
lem of religious history. Here the general history of religion sets in, 
which was grounded in the study of Eastern languages and their 
literature. It developed from two sides: constructively in Hegel, 
Bauer, Strauss, Zeller, and from an understanding of singular great 
phenomena <and their local spheres> in Jakob Grimm, Müllenhof,23 
etc., in Max Müller,24 Deussen,25 Oldenberg26, etc., in Usener27 and 
Dietrich.28
Against this background, there emerged from psychology a new 
attempt to grasp the essence of religion. It was initiated by William 
22 Johann August Wilhelm Neander (1789– 1850), German theologian and 
church historian.
23 Karl Muellenhoff (1818– 1884), German philologist with interests in religion 
and myth.
24 Friedrich Max Müller (1823– 1900), German born philologist and Oriental-
ist, who lived and taught in England most of his life.
25 Paul Deussen (1845– 1919), German Indologist and philosopher, influenced 
by Schopenhauer.
26 Hermann Oldenberg (1854– 1920), German Indologist.
27 Hermann Usener (1823– 1905), German scholar of philology and compara-
tive religion. He married Dilthey’s sister and his correspondence with Dilthey can be 
found in Dilthey’s Briefwechsel, vols. 1 and 2 (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 
2011, 2015).
28 Franz Dietrich (1810– 1883), German theologian and Orientalist.
302
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
312 
VI
James, who was endowed with an astonishing gift for seeing the 
realities of psychic life. Uninfluenced by previous psychological sys-
tem building, he possessed the resources that came with the accep-
tance of possible effects stemming from unconscious psychic life. 
In America, he found himself surrounded by sects in which reli-
gious lived experience asserted itself with great force, independent 
of tradition. The strength of the American spirit lies in the fact that 
people who came from the social stratification, political structure, 
and traditions of religious faith in Europe, emancipated themselves 
from these historical foundations and began a new life on a new 
terrain. In America, the state came to be dominated by economic life. 
But the large role played by the sects that emigrated from England 
generated a counteracting force: the power of religious lived ex-
perience and a Christian ethos. This experience exhibited itself in 
countless confessions of faith and autobiographies. And profound 
minds, who connected this religious lived experience with the re-
sults of German culture— Emerson above all others— further re-
fined this kind of Christianity. This is how a psychology of religion 
developed on an empirical foundation in America.
I.
The [human] science of religion can solve its specific problem only 
in conjunction with that of philosophy. Qua history of religion and 
comparative religion, it finds itself led back to the concepts of life, 
life- experience, fantasy, etc. It requires an answer to the question 
whether it is possible to attain higher principles of psychology for 
the analysis of what is historically given. To the extent that the 
analysis of religion considers the relations of religion to art, meta-
physics, and science, as well as to general conceptions about world- 
views, ideals, the shaping of life, ethics, and duty, its problems must 
be solved by the general theory of the formation of the human sci-
ences. And finally, insofar as the problems of the value of religion as 
such and of the comparative worth of specific religions, of the truth 
of their assertions and of the future of religious development, must 
be seen as the ultimate challenge for the inquiry into religion, they 
cannot be relinquished to theology or to speculative philosophies of 
religion and of history. Religious inquiry would thereby voluntarily 
abdicate its responsibility; it would renounce the natural sphere of 
303
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 
tHe ProBlem of relIGIon (1911) 
313
knowledge1 which also enables the human sciences to guide our life, 
and thereby surrender the field to pseudo- sciences.
This important problem has been made urgent by the apparent 
results of historical research. They show contradictions among the 
religious assertions of different religions and among the accounts 
of their sources— all of which render their truth quite problematic. 
The human science of religion must finally heal the wounds that his-
torical research has inflicted.
This yields the following result: The problems of religious his-
tory are soluble only as part of a universal scientific system that is 
dependent on philosophical investigations. This system must pro-
vide objectively valid cognition that stands above all unprovable 
world- views— consequently, it may not be metaphysical in the old 
sense. And like any foundation in the human sciences, it needs only 
to comprise those propositions requisite for such cognition.
1
All knowledge, including the human science of religion, requires 
an initial logical clarification that provides a consciousness of the 
universal valid judgmental relations that constitute the structure of 
thought. Beyond the evidence that arises from this, there is the feel-
ing of conviction contained in the objectivity of judgments. It is 
based on locating the structure of thought within the structure of 
perception and experience in accordance with the laws and forms 
of logic.
The fact that in the structure of thought, knowledge is consti-
tuted by universally valid judgments— does not contain an a priori 
as its condition. The analysis of this fact in logic (analytical logic) is 
completely different from epistemology. The latter devoted itself to 
the analysis of the sciences by directing them to their presupposi-
tions. It began with the natural sciences, and thereby established the 
phenomenality of their object. This analysis, however, proved inca-
pable of overcoming skepticism, as can be seen in the controversies 
1 The idea of a natural sphere (Zusammenhang) of knowledge is broader than 
the idea of a natural system (System) of the human sciences that dominated from 
the sixteenth to the eighteenth century according to Dilthey (see GS 76−77 = above). 
Neither idea is to be equated with the world- view of naturalism. Only when what is 
natural is doctrinally expanded into an “ism” does Dilthey begin to worry that the 
richness of life is being truncated.
304
This content downloaded from 137.189.171.235 on Sun, 17 Nov 2019 07:08:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
314 
VI
surrounding Kant in [Schulze’s] Aenesidemus, Maimon,2 Fichte, etc. 
It goes without saying that these investigations referred back to the 
I. [The need] to overcome conceiving this I as [a merely] thinking 
subject. Totality, life, etc.
2
Above all, it should be clear that all the assertions that are made 
in religion, art, world- views, and metaphysics are entirely distinct 
from those that universally valid science formulates about them as 
human science configurations. The human sciences take cognizance 
of all that prevails at any time, and of the relations among produc-
tive systems; they assess worth, means, and ends; they then apply it 
by means of chronology, critique, interpretation, etc.
3
Life is the productive 